
===== B1G-M-Grd8-TI · page 1 =====
Grade 8 B.E.S.T. Instructional Guide for Mathematics
The B.E.S.T. Instructional Guide for Mathematics (B1G - M) is intended to assist educators with
planning for student learning and instruction aligned to Florida’s Benchmarks for Excellent
Student Thinking (B.E.S.T.) Standards. This guide is designed to aid high - quality instruction
through the identification of components tha t support the learning and teaching of the B.E.S.T.
Mathematics Standards and Benchmarks. The B1G - M includes an analysis of information related
to the B.E.S.T. Standards for Mathematics within this specific mathematics course, the
instructional emphasis an d aligned resources. This document is posted on the B.E.S.T. Standards
for Mathematics webpage of the Florida D epartment of Education’s website and will continue to
undergo edits as needed.
Structural Framework and Intentional Design of the B.E.S.T. Standards for Mathematics
Florida’s B.E.S.T. Standards for Mathematics were built on the following.
• The coding sc heme for the standards and benchmarks was changed to be consistent with
other content areas. The new coding scheme is structured as follows:
Content.GradeLevel.Strand.Standard.Benchmark.
• Strands were streamlined to be more consistent throughout.
• The standards and benchmarks were written to be clear and concise to ensure that they
are easily understood by all stakeholders.
• The benchmarks were written to allow teachers to meet students’ individual skills,
knowled ge and ability.
• The benchmarks were written to allow students the flexibility to solve problems using a
method or strategy that is accurate, generalizable and efficient depending on the content
(i.e., the numbers, expressions or equations).
• The benchmarks were written to allow for student discovery (i.e., exploring) of strategies
rather than the teaching, naming and assessing of each strategy individually.
• The benchmarks were written to support multiple pathways for success in career and
college for studen ts.
• The benchmarks should not be taught in isolation but should be combined purposefully.
• The benchmarks may be addressed at multiple points throughout the year, with the
intention of gaining mastery by the end of the year.
• Appropriate progression of co ntent within and across strands was developed for each
grade level and across grade levels.
• There is an intentional balance of conceptual understanding and procedural fluency with
the application of accurate real - world context intertwined within mathematic al concepts
for relevance.
• The use of other content areas, like science and the arts, within real - world problems
should be accurate, relevant, authentic and reflect grade level appropriateness.

===== B1G-M-Grd8-TI · page 2 =====
Components of the B.E.S.T. Instructional Guide for Mathematics
The following table is an example of the layout for each benchmark and includes the defining
attributes for each component. It is important to note that instruction should not be limited to t he
possible connecting benchmarks, related terms, strategies or examples provided. To do so would
strip the intention of an educator meeting students’ individual skills, knowledge and abilities.
Benchmark
focal point for instruction within lesson or task
This section includes the benchmark as identified in the B.E.S.T. Standards for Mathematics .
The benchmark, also referred to as the Benchmark of Focus, is the focal point for student
learning and instruction. The benchmark, and its related example(s) and clarification(s), can also
be found in the course descrip tion. The 9 - 12 benchmarks may be included in multiple courses,
select the example(s) or clarification(s) as appropriate for the identified course.
Connecting Benchmarks/Horizontal Alignment Terms from the K - 12 Glossary
in other standards within the grade level or course
This section includes a list of connecting This section includes terms from
benchmarks that relate horizontally to the Appendix C: K - 12 Glossary, found
Benchmark of Focus. Horizontal alignment is within the B.E.S.T. Standards for
the intentional progression of content within a Mathematics document, which are
grade level or course linking skills within and relevant to the identified Benchmark
across strands. Connecting benchmarks are of Focus. The terms included in this
benchmarks that either make a mathematical section should not be viewed as a
connection or include prerequisite skills. The comprehensive vo cabulary list, but
information included in this section is not a instead should be considered during
comprehensive list, and educators are instruction or act as a reference for
encouraged to find other conn ecting educators.
benchmarks. Additionally, this list will not
include benchmarks from the same standard
since benchmarks within the same standard
already have an inherent connection.
Vertical Alignment
across grade levels or c ourses :
This section includes a list of related benchmarks that connect vertically to the Benchmark of
Focus. Vertical alignment is the intentional progression of content from one year to the next,
spanning across multiple grade levels. Benchmarks listed in this s ection make mathematical
connections from prior grade levels or courses in future grade levels or courses within and
across strands. If the Benchmark of Focus is a new concept or skill, it may not have any
previous benchmarks listed. Likewise, if the Bench mark of Focus is a mathematical skill or
concept that is finalized in learning and does not have any direct connection to future grade
levels or courses, it may not have any future benchmarks listed. The information included in
this section is not a compre hensive list, and educators are encouraged to find other benchmarks
within a vertical progression.
Purpose and Instructional Strategies
2 | Page

===== B1G-M-Grd8-TI · page 3 =====
This section includes further narrative for instruction of the benchmark and vertical alignment.
Additionally, this section may also include the following:
• explanations and details for the benchmark;
• vocabulary not provided within Appendix C;
• possible ins tructional strategies and teaching methods; and
• strategies to embed potentially related Mathematical Thinking and Reasoning Standards
(MTRs).
Common Misconceptions or Errors
This section will include common student misconceptions or errors and may include strategies
to address the identified misconception or error. Recognition of these misconceptions and errors
enables educators to identify them in the classroom and make efforts to correct the
misconception or error. This corrective effort in the cl assroom can also be a form of formative
assessment within instruction.
Strategies to Support Tiered Instruction
The instructional strategies in this section address the common misconceptions and errors listed
within the above section that can be a barrier to successfully learning the benchmark. All
instruction and intervention at Tiers 2 and 3 are intended to suppor t students to be successful
with Tier 1 instruction. Strategies that support tiered instruction are intended to assist teachers
in planning across any tier of support and should not be considered exclusive or inclusive of
other instructional strategies tha t may support student learning with the B.E.S.T. Mathematics
Standards. For more information about tiered instruction, please see the Effective Tiered
Instruction for Mathematics: ALL Means ALL document.
Instructional Tasks
demonstrate the depth of the benchmark and the connection to the related benchmarks
This section will include example instructional tasks, which may be open - ended and are
intended to demonstrate the depth of the benchmark. Some instructional tasks include
integration of the Mathematical Thinking and Reasoning Standards (MTRs) and related
benchmark(s). Enrichment tasks may be included to make connections to benchmarks in later
grade levels or courses. Tasks may require extended time, additional materials and
collaboration.
Instructional Items
demonstrate the focus of the benchmark
This section will include example instructional items which may be used as evidence to
demonstrate the students’ understanding of the benchmark. Items may highlight one or more
parts of the benchmark.
*The strategies, tasks and items included in the B1G - M are examples and should not be considered comprehensive.
3 | Page

===== B1G-M-Grd8-TI · page 4 =====
Mathematical Thinking and Reasoning Standards
MTRs: Because Math Matters
Florida students are expected to engage with mathematics through the Mathematical Thinking
and Reasoning Standards (MTRs) by utilizing their language as a self - monitoring tool in the
classroom, promoting deeper learning and understanding of mathematics. The MTRs are
standards which sh ould be used as a lens when planning for student learning and instruction of
the B.E.S.T. Standards for Mathematics.
Structural Framework and Intentional Design of the Mathematical Thinking and Reasoning
Standards
The Mathematical Thinking and Reasoning Standards (MTRs) are built on the following.
• The MTRs have the same coding scheme as the standards and benchmarks; however,
they are written at the standard level because there are no benchmarks.
• In order to fulfill Florida’s unique coding scheme, the 5th place (benchmark) will always
be a “1” for the MTRs.
• The B.E.S.T. Standards for Mathematics should be taught through the lens of the MTRs.
• At least one of the MTRs should be authentically and appropriately embedded throughout
every lesson based on th e expectation of the benchmark(s).
• The bulleted language of the MTRs were written for students to use as self - monitoring
tools during daily instruction.
• The clarifications of the MTRs were written for teachers to use as a guide to inform their
instructio nal practices.
• The MTRs ensure that students stay engaged, persevere in tasks, share their thinking,
balance conceptual understanding and procedures, assess their solutions, make
connections to previous learning and extended knowledge, and apply mathemati cal
concepts to real - world applications.
• The MTRs should not stand alone as a separate focus for instruction, but should be
combined purposefully.
• The MTRs will be addressed at multiple points throughout the year, with the intention of
gaining mastery of mathematical skills by the end of the year and building upon these
skills as they continue in their K - 12 education.
4 | Page

===== B1G-M-Grd8-TI · page 5 =====
MA.K12.MTR.1.1 Actively participate in effortful learning both individually and
collectively.
Mathematicians who participate in effortful learning both individually and with others:
• Analyze the problem in a way that makes sense given the task.
• Ask questions that will help with solving the task.
• Build perseverance by modifying methods as needed whi le solving a challenging task.
• Stay engaged and maintain a positive mindset when working to solve tasks.
• Help and support each other when attempting a new method or approach.
Clarifications:
Teachers who encourage students to participate actively in effortful learning both individually
and with others:
• Cultivate a community of growth mindset learners.
• Foster perseverance in students by choosing tasks that are challenging.
• Develop students’ ability to analyze and problem solve.
• Recognize students’ eff ort when solving challenging problems.
MA.K12.MTR.2.1 Demonstrate understanding by representing problems in multiple
ways.
Mathematicians who demonstrate understanding by representing problems in multiple ways:
• Build understanding through modeling and using manipulatives.
• Represent solutions to problems in multiple ways using objects, drawings, tables, graphs
and equations.
• Progress from modeling problems with objects and drawings to using algorithms and
equations.
• Express connections between concepts and representations.
• Choose a representation based on the given context or purpose.
Clarifications:
Teachers who encourage st udents to demonstrate understanding by representing problems in
multiple ways:
• Help students make connections between concepts and representations.
• Provide opportunities for students to use manipulatives when investigating concepts.
• Guide students from concrete to pictorial to abstract representations as understanding
progresses.
• Show students that various representations can have different purposes and can be
useful in different situations.
5 | Page

===== B1G-M-Grd8-TI · page 6 =====
MA.K12.MTR.3.1 Complete tasks with mathematical fluency.
M athematicians who complete tasks with mathematical fluency:
• Select efficient and appropriate methods for solving problems within the given context.
• Maintain flexibility and accuracy while performing procedures and mental calculations.
• Complete tasks accurately and with confidence.
• Adapt procedures to apply them to a new context.
• Use feedback to improve efficiency when performing calculations.
Clarifications:
Teachers who encourage students to complete tasks with mathematical fluency:
• Provide students with the flexibility to solve problems by selecting a procedure that
allows them to solve efficiently and accurately.
• Offer multiple opportunities for students to practice efficient and generalizable methods.
• Provide opportunities for students to reflect on the method they used and determine if a
more efficient method could have been used.
MA.K12.MTR.4.1 Engage in discussions that reflect on the mathematical thinking of
self and others.
Mathematicians who engage in discussions that reflect on the mathematical thinking of self and
others:
• Communicate mathematical ideas, vocabulary and methods effectively.
• Analyze the mathematical thinking of others.
• Compare the efficiency of a method to t hose expressed by others.
• Recognize errors and suggest how to correctly solve the task.
• Justify results by explaining methods and processes.
• Construct possible arguments based on evidence.
Clarifications:
Teachers who encourage students to engage in dis cussions that reflect on the mathematical
thinking of self and others:
• Establish a culture in which students ask questions of the teacher and their peers, and
error is an opportunity for learning.
• Create opportunities for students to discuss their thinking with peers.
• Select, sequence and present student work to advance and deepen understanding of
correct and increasingly efficient methods.
• Develop students’ ability to justify methods and compare their responses to the
responses of their peers.
6 | Page

===== B1G-M-Grd8-TI · page 7 =====
MA.K12.MTR.5.1 Use patterns and structure to help understand and connect
mathematical concepts.
Mathematicians who use patterns and structure to help understand and connect mathematical
concepts:
• Focus on relevant details within a problem.
• Create plans an d procedures to logically order events, steps or ideas to solve problems.
• Decompose a complex problem into manageable parts.
• Relate previously learned concepts to new concepts.
• Look for similarities among problems.
• Connect solutions of problems to more complicated large - scale situations.
Clarifications:
Teachers who encourage students to use patterns and structure to help understand and connect
mathematical concepts:
• Help students recognize the patterns in the world around them and connect these
pattern s to mathematical concepts.
• Support students to develop generalizations based on the similarities found among
problems.
• Provide opportunities for students to create plans and procedures to solve problems.
• Develop students’ ability to construct relationshi ps between their current understanding
and more sophisticated ways of thinking.
MA.K12.MTR.6.1 Assess the reasonableness of solutions.
Mathematicians who assess the reasonableness of solutions:
• Estimate to discover possible solutions.
• Use benchmark quantities to determine if a solution makes sense.
• Check calculations when solving problems.
• Verify possible solutions by explaining the methods used.
• Evaluate results based on the given context.
Clarifications:
Teachers who encourage students t o assess the reasonableness of solutions:
• Have students estimate or predict solutions prior to solving.
• Prompt students to continually ask, “Does this solution make sense? How do you
know?”
• Reinforce that students check their work as they progress within and after a task.
• Strengthen students’ ability to verify solutions through justifications.
7 | Page

===== B1G-M-Grd8-TI · page 8 =====
MA.K12.MTR.7.1 Apply mathematics to real - world contexts.
Mathematicians who apply mathematics to real - world contexts:
• Connect mathematical concepts to everyday experiences.
• Use models and methods to understand, represent and solve problems.
• Perform investigations to gather data or determine if a method is appropriate.
• Redesign models and methods to improve accuracy or ef ficiency.
Clarifications:
Teachers who encourage students to apply mathematics to real - world contexts:
• Provide opportunities for students to create models, both concrete and abstract, and
perform investigations.
• Challenge students to question the accuracy of their models and methods.
• Support students as they validate conclusions by comparing them to the given situation.
• Indicate how various concepts can be applied to other disciplines.
8 | Page

===== B1G-M-Grd8-TI · page 9 =====
Examples of Teacher and Student Moves for the MTRs
Below are examples that demonstrate the embedding of the MTRs within the mathematics
classroom. The provided teacher and student moves are examples of how some MTRs could be
incorporated into student learning and instruction keeping in mind the benchmark(s ) that are the
focal point of the lesson or task. The information included in this table is not a comprehensive
list, and educators are encouraged to incorporate other teacher and student moves that support
the MTRs.
MTR Student Moves Teacher Moves
MA. K12.MTR.1.1
• Students engage in the task • Teacher provides flexible
Actively participate through individual analysis, options (i.e., differentiated,
in effortful learning
student - to - teacher interaction challenging tasks that allow
both individually and student - to - student students to actively pursue a
and collectively. interaction. solution both individually and in
• Students ask task - appropriate grou ps) so that all students have
the opportunity to access and
questions to self, the teacher and
to other students. (MTR.4.1) engage with instruction, as well
as demonstrate their learning.
• Students have a positive
productive struggle exhibiting • Teacher creates a physical
environment that supports a
growth mindset, even when
making a mistake. growth mindset and will ensure
positive student engagement and
• Students stay engaged in the
collaboratio n.
task to a purposeful conclusion
w hile modifying methods, when • Teacher provides constructive,
encouraging feedback to
necessary, in solving a problem
through self - analysis and students that recognizes their
perseverance. efforts and the value of analysis
and revision.
• Teacher provides appropriate
time for student processing,
productive struggle and
reflection.
• Teacher uses data and questions
to focus students on their
thinking; help students
determine their sources of
struggle and to build
understanding.
• Teacher encourages students to
ask appropriate questions of
other students and of the teacher
including questions that
examine accu racy. (MTR.4.1)
9 | Page

===== B1G-M-Grd8-TI · page 10 =====
MTR Student Moves Teacher Moves
MA.K12.MTR.2.1
• Students represent problems • Teacher provides students with
Demonstrate concretely using objects, models objects, models, manipulatives,
understanding by
and manipulatives. appropriate technology and real -
representing world situations. (MTR.7.1)
• Students represent problems
problems in
pictorially using drawings, • Teacher encourages students to
multiple ways.
models, tables an d graphs. use drawings, models, tables,
• Students represent problems expressions, equations and
graphs to represent problems
abstractly using numerical or
algebraic expressions and a nd solutions.
equations. • Teacher questions students
about making connections
• Students make connections and
between different
select among different
representations and methods for representations and methods and
challenges students to choose
the same problem, as
appropriate to different one that is most appropriate to
the context. (MTR.3.1)
situations or cont ext. (MTR.3.1)
• Teacher encourages students to
explain their differen t
representations and methods to
each other. (MTR.4.1)
• Teacher provides opportunities
for students to choose
appropriate methods and to use
mathematical technology.
MA.K12.MTR.3.1
• Students complete tasks with • Teacher provides tasks and
Complete tasks with flexibility, efficiency and opportunities to explore and
mathematical accuracy. share different methods to solve
fluency.
• Students use feedb ack from problem s. (MTR.1.1)
peers and teachers to reflect on • Teacher provides opportunities
and revise methods used. for students to choose methods
• Students build confidence and reflect (i.e., through error
analysis, revision, summarizing
through practice in a variety of
contexts and problems. methods or writing) on the
(MTR.1.1) efficiency and accuracy of the
method(s) chosen.
• Teacher asks questions and
gives feedb ack to focus student
thinking to build efficiency of
accurate methods.
• Teacher offers multiple
opportunities to practice
generalizable methods.
10 | Page

===== B1G-M-Grd8-TI · page 11 =====
MTR Student Moves Teacher Moves
MA.K12.MTR.4.1
• Students use content specific • Teacher provides students with
Engage in language to communicate and opport unities (through open -
discussions that
justify mathematical ideas and ended tasks, questions and class
reflect on the chosen methods. structure) to make sense of their
mathematical thinking. (MTR.1.1)
• Students use discussions and
thinking of self and
reflections to recognize errors • Teacher uses precise
others.
and revise their thinking. mathematical language, both
written and abstract, and
• Students use discussions to
analyze the mathematical encourages students to revise
their language through
thinking of others.
discussion.
• Students identify errors within
• Teache r creates opportunities
their own work and then
determine possible reasons and for students to discuss and
reflect on their choice of
potential corrections.
methods, their errors and
• When working in small groups,
revisions and their justifications.
students recognize errors of their
• Teachers select, sequence and
peers and offers suggestions.
present student work to elicit
discussion about different
methods and representation s.
(MTR.2.1, MTR.3.1)
MA.K12.MTR.5.1
• Students identify relevant details • Teacher asks questions to help
Use patterns and in a problem in order to create students construct relationships
structure to help
plans and decompose problems between familiar and unfamiliar
understand and into manageable parts. problems and to transfer this
connect
• Students find similarities and relationship to solve other
mathematical common structures, or patterns, problems. (MTR.1.1)
concepts.
between problems in order to • Teacher provides students
solve related and more complex opportunities to connect prior
problems usin g prior and current understanding to
knowledge. new concepts.
• Teacher provides opportunities
for students to discuss and
develop generalizations about a
mathematical concept.
(MTR.3.1, MTR.4.1)
• Teacher allows students to
develop an appropriate sequence
of steps in solving probl ems.
• Teacher provides opportunities
for students to reflect during
problem solving to make
connections to problems in other
contexts, noticing structure and
making improvements to their
process.
11 | Page

===== B1G-M-Grd8-TI · page 12 =====
MTR Student Moves Teacher Moves
MA.K12.MTR.6.1
• St udents estimate a solution, • Teacher provides opportunities
Assess the including using benchmark for students to estimate or
reasonableness of
quantities in place of the original predict solutions prior to
solutions. numbers in a problem. solving.
• Students monitor calculations, • Teacher encourages students to
procedures and intermediate compare results to estimations
results during the process of and revise if necessary for future
solving problems. situations. (MTR.5.1)
• Students verify and check if • Teacher prompts students to
soluti ons are viable, or self - monitor by continually
reasonable, within the context or asking, “Does this solution or
situation. (MTR.7.1) intermediate result make sense?
• Students reflect on the accuracy How do you know?”
of their estimations and their • Teacher encourages students to
solutions. provide explanations and
justifications for results to self
and others. (MTR.4.1)
MA.K12.MTR.7.1 • Students connect mathematical • Teacher provides real - world
Apply mathematics
concepts to everyday context to help students build
to real - world experiences. understanding of abstract
contexts. mathematical ideas.
• Students use mathematical
models and methods to • Teacher encourages students to
understand, represent and solve assess the validity and accuracy
real - world problems. of mathematical models and
• Students investigate, research s ituations in real - world context,
and gather data to determine if a and to revise those models if
necessary.
mathematical model is
appropriate for a given situation • Teacher provides opportunities
from the world around them. for students to investigate,
research and gather data to
• Students re - desi gn models and
methods to improve accuracy or determine if a mathematical
model is appropriate for a given
efficiency.
situation from the world around
them.
• Teacher provides opportunities
for students to apply concepts to
other content areas.
12 | Page

===== B1G-M-Grd8-TI · page 13 =====
Grade 8 Areas of Emphasis
In grade 8 , ins tructional time will emphasize six areas:
(1) representing numbers in scientific notation and extending the set of numbers to the
system of real numbers, which includes irrational numbers ;
(2) generate equivalent numeric and algebraic expressions including using the Laws of
Exponents ;
(3) creating and reasoning about linear relationships including modeling an association in
bivariate data with a linear equation ;
(4) solving linear equations, inequalities and systems of linear equations;
(5) developing an understanding of the concept of a function and
(6) analyzing two - dimensional figures, particularly triangles, using distance, angle and
applying the Pythagorean Theorem.
The purpose of the areas of emphasis is not to guide specific units of learning and instruction, but
rather provide insight on major mathematical topics that will be covered within this mathematics
course. In addition to its purpose, the areas of emphasis are built on the following.
• S upport s the intentional horizontal progression within the strands and across the strands
in this grade level or course.
• Student learning and instruction should not focus on the stated areas of emphasis as
individual units.
• Areas of emphasis are addressed within standards and benchmarks throughout the cours e
so that students are making connections throughout the school year.
• S ome benchmarks can be organized within more than one area.
• Supports the communication of the major mathematical topics to all stakeholders.
• Benchmarks within the areas of emphasis sho uld not be taught within the order in which
they appear. To do so would strip the progression of mathematical ideas and miss the
opportunity to enhance horizontal progressions within the grade level or course.
The table on the next page shows how the benc hmarks within this mathematics course are
embedded within the areas of emphasis.
13 | Page

===== B1G-M-Grd8-TI · page 14 =====
Real
Equivalent Two - variable
Number Solving
Expressions, Linear Two -
System, Equations,
Including Relationships, Functions Dimensional
Including Inequalities
Law of Including Figures
Scientific and Systems
Exponents Bivariate Data
Notation
MA.8.NSO.1.1 x x
MA.8.NSO.1.2 x x x
MA.8.NSO.1.3 x
MA.8.NSO.1.4 x x
MA.8.NSO.1.5 x x
MA.8.NSO.1.6 x x
Number Sense and Operations
MA.8.NSO.1.7 x x x x x
MA.8.AR.1.1 x
MA.8.AR.1.2 x
MA.8.AR.1.3 x
MA.8.AR.2.1 x x
MA.8.AR.2.2
x x
x
MA.8.AR.2.3 x x
MA.8.AR.3.1 x x
MA.8.AR.3.2 x x
MA.8.AR.3.3 x x
Algebraic Reasoning MA.8.AR.3.4
x x
MA.8.AR.3.5
x x
MA.8.AR.4.1 x x x
MA.8.AR.4.2 x x
MA.8.AR.4.3 x x
MA.8.F.1.1 x
MA.8.F.1.2 x x
Functions
MA.8.F.1.3 x x
G e MA.8.GR.1.1 x x x
14 | Page

===== B1G-M-Grd8-TI · page 15 =====
Real
Equivalent Two - variable
Number Solving
Expressions, Linear Two -
System, Equations,
Including Relationships, Functions Dimensional
Including Inequalities
Law of Including Figures
Scientific and Systems
Exponents Bivariate Data
Notation
MA.8.GR.1.2 x x x
MA.8.GR.1.3
x x x
MA.8.GR.1.4 x x
MA.8.GR.1.5
x x
MA.8.GR.1.6 x x
MA.8.GR.2.1 x
MA.8.GR.2.2
x
MA.8.GR.2.3 x
MA.8.GR.2.4 x x
MA.8.DP.1.1 x x
MA.8.DP.1.2 x
MA.8.DP.1.3
x
MA.8.DP.2.1 x
MA.8.DP.2.2 x
MA.8.DP.2.3
Data Analysis & Probability x
15 | Page

===== B1G-M-Grd8-TI · page 16 =====
Number Sense and Operations
MA. 8 .NSO.1 Solve problems involving rational numbers, including numbers in scientific
notation, and extend the understanding of rational numbers to irrational numbers.
MA.8.NSO.1.1
Benchmark
Extend previous understanding of rational numbers to define irrational
MA.8.NSO.1.1 numbers within the real number system. Locate an approximate value of a
numerical expression involving irrational numbers on a number line.
Example: Within the expression 1 + √ 30 , the irrational number √ 30 can be estimated to be
2 2
( )
between 5 and 6 because 30 is between 25 and 36 . By considering 5 . 4 and ( 5 . 5 ) ,
a closer approximation for 30 is 5 . 5 . So, the expression 1 + 30 is equivalent to
√ √
about 6 . 5 .
Benchmark Clarifications:
Clarifi cation 1: Instruction includes the use of number line and rational number approximations, and
recognizing pi ( π ) as an irrational number.
Clarification 2: Within this benchmark, the expectation is to approximate numerical expressions
involving one arithmetic operation and estimating square roots or pi ( π ).
Connecting Benchmarks/Horizontal Alignment Terms from the K - 12 Glossary
• MA.8.AR.2.3 • Expression
• MA.8.GR.1.1, MA.8.GR.1.2 • Irrational N umbers
• N umber L ine
• P i
• R ational N umbers
• R eal N umbers
Vertical Alignment
Previous Benchmarks Next Benchmarks
• MA.7.NSO.1.2 • MA.912. AR.3.1
16 | Page

===== B1G-M-Grd8-TI · page 17 =====
Purpose and Instructional Strategies
In grade 7 , students express ed rational numbers using term inating and repeating decimals. In
grade 8, students define irrational numbers and determine the ir approximate location on a
number line . In Algebra 1 , students will expand their knowledge of the real number system to
understand that complex numbers exist from their work with quadratics .
• Instruction includes using and creating a graphic organizer to show the relationship
between the subsets of the real number system.
• Once students understand that (1) every rational number has a decimal representation that
either terminates or repeats, and (2) every terminating or repeating decimal is a rational
number, they can reason that on the number line, irrational numbers must have decimal
representations that neither terminate nor repeat.
• Students sometimes overgeneralize that all squa re roots are rational numbers concluding
that irrational numbers are unusual and rare. Instruction includes a variety of examples of
irrational numbers. Irrational numbers are much more plentiful than rational numbers, in
the sense that they are denser in the real number line.
• Instruction includes the understanding that the square root of a whole number is either
a nother whole number or is irrational. When the result is another whole number, the
original whole number is a perfect square. This fact is part icularly relevant when the
Pythagorean Theorem is applied to find a missing side length of a triangle whose other
two side lengths are whole numbers.
• Instruction includes the understanding that the cube root of a whole number is either
another whole number or is irrational. When the result is another whole number, the
original whole number is a perfect cube.
• Instruction includes the understanding that adding or subtracting a rational number and an
irrational number produces an irrational number . The same is true of multiplication or
division unless the rational number is 0.
• Students should develop estimating skills when working with square roots without the
use of a calculator. One strategy is to use benchmark square roots to determine an
approximate value.
o For example, to find an approximation of √ 28 , first determine the perfect squares
28 is between, which would be 25 and 36 . The square roots of 25 and 36 are 5
and 6 , respectively, so we know that 28 is between 5 and 6 . Since 28 is closer
√
to 25 , an estimate of the square root would be closer to 5 .
Common Misconceptions or Errors
17 | Page

===== B1G-M-Grd8-TI · page 18 =====
• Students may incorrectly believe that pi ( 𝜋 ) is a rational number since they have only
been introduced to a decimal approximation and a fraction approximation. To address
this misconception, instruction includes looking further at the decimal representation of
pi ( 𝜋 ) so that students will notice that a pattern will not emerge. In fact, a pattern never
emerges, therefore, pi is irrational.
• Students may incorrectly think that the number line only has the numbers that are labeled.
• Students may incorrectly think a numerical expression that includes addition or
subtraction cannot be placed on a number line.
o For example, 2 + √ 3 can be placed on a number line at approximately 3 . 73 .
Strategies to Support Tiered Instruction
• Teacher provides opportunities to look at the decimal representation of pi ( 𝜋 ) and
comparing decimal representations of rational numbers and irrational numbers.
• Teachers provide opportunities for practice with performing decimal expansion of
rational and irrational numbers to check for a pattern.
• Teacher models how to estimate a numerical expression with addition or subtraction and
locates a place on the number line.
o For example , s how a representation of pi ( 𝜋 ) and compare it to a decimal
22 1
representation of . Students should identify that is a rational number and
7 3
22
repeats 0 . 3333 , and that is pi ( 𝜋 = 3 . 1415 …) and doesn’t repeat.
7
o For example, a first approximation of 3 + √ 5 , students could approximate √ 5 as
2.2 5 since 5 is between the perfect squares of 4 and 9, but closer to 4. Therefore
√ 5 would be in between 2 and 3, but closer to 2. So, a reasonable guess for √ 5
can be 2.25 and therefore a reasonable estimate for 3 + √ 5 would be 3 + 2 . 25
which equals 5.25. If more ac curacy is required, students should understand that a
calculator is needed.
• Instruction includes looking further at the decimal representation of pi ( 𝜋 ) so that
students will notice that a pattern will not emerge. In fact, a pattern never emerges,
theref ore, pi is irrational.
18 | Page

===== B1G-M-Grd8-TI · page 19 =====
Instructional Tasks
Instructional Task 1 (MTR.1.1)
Part A. Provide an example of a rational number and explain how you can determine that it is
rational.
Part B. Choose which number (s) below are irrational and explain how you can determine that
they are ir rational.
a) √ 3 − 2
b) 6 √ 25
3
c) √ 36
d) 2 𝜋
3
e) − 4 + √ − 216
Instructional Task 2 (MTR.4.1)
Part A. Use the number lines below to estimate the value of √ 8 . Explain why you put the
points where you did.
Part B. Plot 1 + √ 8 on a number line . Explain your process with a partner.
Instructional Items
Instructional Item 1
Plot the following numbers on a number line showing their approximate location to the
nearest hundredth .
a. 𝜋 − 2
1
b. − ( 𝜋 )
2
c. 2 √ 2
d. 2 + √ 17
Instructional Item 2
Is 0.12345 a rational or irrational number? Explain your answer.
*The strategies, tasks and items included in the B1G - M are examples and should not be considered comprehensive.
19 | Page

===== B1G-M-Grd8-TI · page 20 =====
MA.8.NSO.1.2
Benchmark
Plot, order and compare rational and irrational numbers, represented in various
MA.8.NSO.1.2
forms.
Benchmark Clarifications:
Clarification 1: Within this benchmark, it is not the expectation to work with the number 𝑒 .
Clarification 2: Within this benchmark, the expectation is to plot, order and compare square roots and
cube roots.
Clarification 3: Within this benchmark, the expectation is t o use symbols ( < , > or = ).
Connecting Benchmarks/Horizontal Alignment Terms from the K - 12 Glossary
• MA.8.AR.2.3 • I rrational N umbers
• MA.8.GR.1.1 , MA.8.GR.1.2 • R ational N umbers
Vertical Alignment
Previous Benchmarks Next Benchmarks
• MA.7.NSO.1.2 • MA.912.NSO.1. 4
• MA.912.GR.3.1
Purpose and Instructional Strategies
In grade 7 , students express ed rational numbers with term inating and repeating decimals. In
grade 8, students define irrational numbers , recognizing and expressing them in various forms,
and students compare rational numbers to irrational numbers . In Algebra 1 , students will perform
operations with radicals . In Geometry, students will extend their understanding of radical
approximations to weighted averages on a number line.
• Students should have the opportunity to draw number lines with appropriate scales to plot
the numbers to provide an understanding of where the numbers are in relation to numbers
that are greater than and less than the number to be plotted.
• Students locat e and compare rational and irrational numbers on the number line.
Additionally, students understand that the value of a square root or a cube root can be
approximated between integer s.
o For example, to find an approximation of √ 28 , two methods are described below,
each using the nearest perfect squares to the radicand:
• determine the perfect squares 28 is between, which would be 25 and 36 .
The square roots of 25 and 36 are 5 and 6 , respectively, so we know that
√ 28 is between 5 and 6 . Since 28 is closer to 25 , an estimate of the
square root would be closer to 5 .
3
• s ince 28 is located of the distance from 25 to 36, the √ 28 is
11
3
approximately located of the distance from √ 25 to √ 36 . So, this
11
3
reasoning gives the approximation √ 25 + , which is about 5.27. This
11
method particularly relevant when students determine weighted averages
on a number line in Geometry.
• Students also recognize that every positive number has both a positive and a negative
square root . The negative square root of n is written as − √ 𝑛 .
20 | Page

===== B1G-M-Grd8-TI · page 21 =====
• Instruction includes the use of technology, including a calculator.
Common Misconceptions or Errors
• Students may not understand that square and cube roots can be plotted on a number line.
Strategies to Support Tiered Instruction
• Instruction includes providing students with examples of square and cube roots for them
to place on a number line and facilitating a conversation on understanding the value of
each square and cube root.
• Teacher provides opportunities to co - construct numbe r lines with appropriate scales and
plot approximate values of cube roots and square roots.
o For example, provide partially completed examples of non - perfect square roots
and non - perfect cube roots by using perfect square roots and perfect cube roots as
ben chmark quantities .
• Teacher pr ovide s support in recognizing that every positive number has both a positive
and negative square root .
o For example, show examples of how multiplying two negative numbers gives a
positive number, and how the square root of a num ber can be both positive and
negative.
• Teacher assists students in writing an inequality to represent written statements.
o For example:
▪ Monique has more books than Mary.
▪ Mark has 5 pencils and Barry has 8.
▪ Animal Kingdom has at least 100 different species of animals.
Instructional Tasks
Instructional Task 1 (MTR.6.1)
Below are irrational and rational numbers.
𝟑
̅
𝟏 . 𝟑 𝝅 √ 𝟑 𝟐 . 𝟑𝟓𝟔 √ 𝟔 √ 𝟒
𝟐
Part A . Order the numbers from least to greatest by plotting on a number line .
Part B. Identify which numbers are irrational.
Part C. Write an inequality that compares a rational number and an irrational number
from the list.
Instructional Items
Instructional Item 1
Plot − 3 . 42857 … on the number line below and explain how you determined its location.
Instructional Item 2
Using the chart below, compare the irrational and rational numbers shown.
Number Write < or > Number
2
𝜋 9
7
√ 50
21 | Page

===== B1G-M-Grd8-TI · page 22 =====
5
√ 8
3
− 2 𝜋 − 6
Instructional Item 3
3 3 3
Plot the following cube roots on a number line √ 8 , √ 10 and √ 27 .
*The strategies, tasks and items included in the B1G - M are examples and should not be considered comprehensive.
MA.8.NSO.1.3
Benchmark
Extend previous understanding of the Laws of Exponents to include integer
exponents. Apply the Laws of Exponents to evaluate numerical expressions
MA.8.NSO.1.3
and generate equivalent numerical expressions, limited to integer exponents
and rational number bases, with p rocedural fluency.
4
2 1
− 3
Example: The expression is equivalent to 2 which is equivalent to .
2 7 8
Benchmark Clarifications:
Clarification 1: Refer to the K - 12 Formulas (Appendix E) for the Laws of Exponents.
Connecting Benchmarks/Horizontal Alignment Terms from the K - 12 Glossary
• MA.8.AR.1.1 , MA.8. AR .1.2 • E xponent
• E xpressions
• I nteger
• R ational N umbers
Vertical Alignment
Previous Benchmarks Next Benchmarks
• MA.7.NSO.1.1 • MA.912.NSO.1.1
Purpose and Instructional Strategies
In grade 7, studen ts were introduced to the Laws of Exponents with numerical expressions.
They focused on generating equivalent numerical expressions with whole - number exponents and
rational number bases. In grade 8, the learning extends to integer exponents. In Algebra 1 ,
students will extend the Laws of Exponents to include rational exponents.
• Instruction focuses on one law at a time to allow for conceptual understanding instead of
just memorizing the rules. Students should be given the opportunity to derive the
properties through experience and reason ing . During instruction, include examples that
show the expansion of the bases using the exponents to show the equivalence. This
strategy allows for moving beyond learning a rule or procedure.
• The expectation for this benchmark includes negative int eger exponents but does not
include fractional exponents.
• Students should develop and engage in understanding the rules of exponents from
exploration. A strategy for developing meaning for integer exponents by making use of
patterns is shown below:
Patterns in Exponents
5
5 5 ∙ 5 ∙ 5 ∙ 5 ∙ 5
22 | Page

===== B1G-M-Grd8-TI · page 23 =====
4
5 5 ∙ 5 ∙ 5 ∙ 5
3
5 5 ∙ 5 ∙ 5
2
5 5 ∙ 5
1
5 5
0
5 1
1
− 1
5
5
1
− 2
5
5 ∙ 5
1
− 3
5
5 ∙ 5 ∙ 5
1
− 4
5
5 ∙ 5 ∙ 5 ∙ 5
1
− 5
5
5 ∙ 5 ∙ 5 ∙ 5 ∙ 5
• Students should develop fluency with and without the use of a calculator when evaluating
numerical expressions involving the Laws of Exponents.
• Instruction includes cases where students must work backwards as well as cases where
the value of a variable must be determined ( MTR.3.1 ). Students should use relational
thinking as well as algebraic thinking.
Common Misconceptions or Errors
• When working with negative exponents, students may not understand the connection to
fractions and values in the denominator. To address this misconception, use expanded
notation to show how to simplify to help support the understanding of exponents and
val ues in the denominator of a fraction.
− 3 − 1 3
5 5
o For example, ( ) can be rewritten as ( ( ) ) which can be rew ritten as
4 4
3
3
1 4 4 4 4
( 5 ) which can be rewritten as ( ) which can be rewritten as ( ) ( ) ( ) which
5 5 5 5
4
64
is equivalent to .
125
23 | Page

===== B1G-M-Grd8-TI · page 24 =====
Strategies to Support Tiered Instruction
• Instruction includes teacher modeling the use expanded notation to show how to simplify.
Have students practice the properties by generating equivalent expressions.
1 1 1 1 1 1 1
2 − 6
o For example, 4 × 4 = which equals or 4 × 4 × × × × × ×
4
4 256 4 4 4 4 4
1 1 − 3
= . Help students to discover how 2 becomes a positive exponent in the
4 256
1
denominator of a fraction, .
3
2
• Instruction includes the use of a conceptual approach as opposed to memorizing the rules
of the laws of integer exponents. Provide examples of the processes that lead to the rules
for each law, such as the “Patterns i n Exponents” table within Instructional Strategies .
• Instruction includes using expanded notation to show how to simplify to help support the
understanding of exponents and values in the denominator of a fraction.
3
− 3 − 1
5 5
o For example, ( ) can be rewritten as ( ( ) ) , which can be rewritten as
4 4
3
3
1 4 4 4 4
( ) , which can be rewritten as ( ) , which can be rewritten as ( ) ( ) ( ) ,
5
5 5 5 5
4
64
which is equivalent to .
125
Instructional Tasks
Instructional Task 1 (MTR.1.1)
− 1
Create an example that will show and explain the difference between − 𝑏 and 𝑏 .
Instructional Task 2 (MTR.5.1)
− 5 5
Create a pattern using the expanded form of the base, 4 , between 4 and 4 . Explain why
0
4 is equal to 1 .
Instructional Items
Instructional Item 1
6 2
3
What is the value of ( ) ?
3 − 4
Instructional Item 2
What is the value of the expression given below .
− 3
2
2
( − ) ( 0 . 8 )
3
Instructional Item 3
1
Which of the following expressions are equivalent to ?
6
2
− 5 − 1
a. 2 ∙ 2
− 2 − 4
b. 2 ∙ 2
1 5
c. 2 ∙ 2
1 6
d. 2 ∙ 2
2 − 8
e. 2 ∙ 2
2 3
f. 2 ∙ 2
*The strategies, tasks and items included in the B1G - M are examples and should not be considered comprehensive.
MA.8.NSO.1.4
24 | Page

===== B1G-M-Grd8-TI · page 25 =====
Benchmark
Express numbers in scientific notation to represent and approximate very large
MA.8.NSO.1.4 or very small quantities. Determine how many times larger or smaller one
number is compared to a second number.
Example: Roderick is comparing two numbers shown in scientific notation on his calculator. The
first number was displayed as 2 . 3147 E 27 and the second number was displayed as
32
3 . 5982 E − 5 . Roderick determines that the first number is about 10 times bigger
than the second number.
Connecting Benchmarks/Horizontal Alignment Terms from the K - 12 Glossary
• MA.8.GR.1.2 • E xponent
• S cientific N otation
Vertical Alignment
Previous Benchmarks Next Benchmarks
• MA.7.NSO.1. 1 • MA.912.GR.4
• MA.7.NSO. 2.1
Purpose and Instructional Strategies
In elementary school, students began to explore the place value system by understanding a
1
number’s value is ten times larger than the number to its right and of the number to its left
10
using whole numbers. In grade 7, students developed an understanding of Laws of Exponents
(Appendix E) with numerical expressions. They focused on generating equivalent numerical
expressions with whole - number exponents and rational number bases. In grade 8, students use
the knowledge of Laws of Exponents to work with scien tific notation. In Geometry, students will
solve problems involving density in terms of area and volume which can be represented using
scientific notation when the numbers are large. Additionally, s tudents can apply their scientific
notation knowledge in s cience courses.
• Instruction builds students’ number sense with scientific notation. Students should see
how representing numbers in a given form allows for students to see the magnitude of
the numbe r in an efficient way.
• Instruction connects place value and expanded form with scientific notation. This will
allow students to compare very large and very small numbers concisely.
thousands hundreds tens ones tenths hundredths thousandths
3 2 1 0 − 1 − 2 − 3
10 10 10 10 . 10 10 10
3 2 4 0 . 0 0 0
0 . 3 2 4
Scientific notation for the numbers within the chart would be represented as
3 − 1
3 . 24 × 10 and 3 . 24 × 10 respectively.
• Students should use place value knowledge to determine how many times larger a
number is compared to another. Students should develop patterns to conclude that if the
exponent increases by one, the value increases 10 times, as well as if the exponent
decre ases by one, the value decreases 10 times.
25 | Page

===== B1G-M-Grd8-TI · page 26 =====
9
o For example, if students are determining how many times bigger 7 × 10 is than
8
3 × 10 . Students will need to recognize that 7 is approximately 2 times larger
9 8
than 3, and 10 is 10 times greater than 10 . Therefore, to determine how many
9
times greater, a student would reason that 7 × 10 is approximately
8
2 × 10 ( or 20 ) times greater than 3 × 10 .
• Instruction connects students understanding of scientific notation to choosing appropriate
units of measures.
• When using calculators to represent very large and very small numbers with an exponent
indicated as “E”, instruction relates the number following “E” as the power of 10.
Common Misconceptions or Errors
• Students often confuse the meaning of the exponent and the value of the number in
scientific notation.
• Some students misrepresent scientific notation by not expressing the number as a product
of a power of 10 and a number that is at least 1 and less than 10.
• Students may incorrectly interpret the “E” on a calculator display as an error message.
• Students may interpret the comparison of two numbers in scientific notation incorrectly.
3
o For example, if students were asked what is 3 times larger than 3 × 10 , they may
9 3
respond with 9 × 10 instead of the correct response of 9 × 10 .
4
o For example, if a student determines the first number is 10 times bigger than the
second number, they may incorrectly believe the first number is 4 times as big as
the second number instead of 1 0 ,000 times bigger.
Strategies to Support Tiered Instruction
• Instruction includes making connections of a number written in standard form to the
same number written in scientific notation. Key connections include recognizing the
similarities in the first two digits of both numbers and the connections between the pla ce
value of the number in standard form and the exponent of the power.
• Teacher provides opportunities for students to utilize calculators and provides instruction
on the various calculator notations for scientific notation.
• Instruction includes rewriting whole numbers in scientific notation when finding products
or quotients with scientific notation in order to demonstrate correct use of operations and
laws of exponents.
4
o For example, if the student is asked what is five times larger than 2 × 10 , they
shoul d be multiplying 5 × 2 , and not multiply by the exponent.
• Teacher provides opportunities for students to check their work by rewriting numbers in
standard form and applying any necessary operations before comparing their solution to
the solution found with t he use of a calculator.
• Instruction includes the use of manipulatives such as base 10 blocks to make connections
to the purpose of utilizing scientific notation.
o For example, the teacher could pose the question: “What would be the best way
for us to repre sent 2430 using Base Ten Blocks. We could use 2430 individual
Base Ten Unit blocks, or we could 2 - Base Ten Cubes, 4 Base Ten Flats, and 3
Base Ten Rods. Students can then see that it would be easier to represent 2430
using the Cubes, Flats, and Rods as op posed to the large amount of individual
Unit blocks. When students see how it would be easier to use the larger blocks to
represent the number, the teacher can explain how itis similar to using scientific
notation to write out very large or very small numb ers. Instead of writing
26 | Page

===== B1G-M-Grd8-TI · page 27 =====
18
2873000000000000000 , they can write 2 . 873 × 10 .
Instructional Tasks
Instructional Task 1 (MTR.6.1)
− 2
The diameter of fishing lines varies. Fishing lines can have a diameter as small as 2 × 10
− 2
inch and as large as 6 × 10 inch.
Part A . Which value belongs to the thicker fishing line?
Part B . How many times larger is the thick line compared to the thin lin e?
Part C . If you want a fishing line whose thickness is in between the two values, what
would be a possible thickness for the line you would like to use?
Instructional Items
Instructional Item 1
The distance in kilometers to Proxima Centauri, the closest star to Earth, is
39,900,000,000,000. Estimate the distance in kilometers to Proxima Centauri by writing it in
the form of a single digit times an integer power of 10 .
Instructional Item 2
The B ohr radius of a hydrogen atom is 0 . 0000000000529 . Express the Bohr radius of a
hydrogen atom in scientific notation .
Instructional Item 3
5
The average weight of a blue whale is 4 × 10 pounds. The average weight of an elephant is
4
1 × 10 pounds. Approximately how many times heavier is a blue whale than an elephant in
pounds?
*The strategies, tasks and items included in the B1G - M are examples and should not be considered comprehensive.
27 | Page

===== B1G-M-Grd8-TI · page 28 =====
MA.8.NSO.1.5
Benchmark
Add, subtract, multiply and divide numbers expressed in scientific notation
MA.8.NSO.1.5
with procedural fluency.
15 13 15
Example: The sum of 2 . 31 × 10 and 9 . 1 × 10 is 2 . 401 × 10 .
Benchmark Clarifications:
Clarification 1: Within this benchmark, for addition and subtraction with numbers expressed in scientific
notation, exponents are limited to within 2 of each other.
Connecting Benchmarks/Horizontal Alignment Terms from the K - 12 Glossary
• MA.8. GR.1.2 • S cientific N otation
Vertical Alignment
Previous Benchmarks Next Benchmarks
• MA.7.NSO.1.1 • MA.912.GR.4
• MA.7.NSO.2.1
Purpose and Instructional Strategies
In grade 7, students developed an understanding of Laws of Exponents (Appendix E) with
numerical expressions. They focused on generating equivalent numerical expressions with
whole - number exponents and rational number bases. In grade 8, students use the knowledge of
Laws of Exponents to work with scientific notation. In Geometry, students will solve problems
invol ving density in terms of area and volume which can be represented using scientific notation
when the numbers are large. Additionally, s tudents can apply their scientific notation knowledge
in science courses.
• Instruction connects the work of scientific not ation with the Laws of Exponents with
integer exponents.
• Instruction includes having students color code or use a highlighter to help keep the
numbers together.
28 7
o For example, when multiply 3 . 2 × 10 and 6 . 7 × 10 , students can highlight the
28 7
3.2 and 6.7 in one color and the 10 and 10 in another color for organizational
purposes.
• Students should develop fluency with and without the use of a calculator when
performing operations with numbers expressed in scientif ic notation.
• It is helpful to include contextual problems to compare numbers written in scientific
notation , includ ing cross - curricular examples from science.
Common Misconceptions or Errors
• Some students may incorrectly apply addition and subtraction across a problem.
3 5 8
o For example, students may miscalculate ( 1 . 3 × 10 ) + ( 3 . 4 × 10 ) as 4 . 7 × 10 .
• Some students may incorrectly apply multiplication across a problem.
4 5 20
o For example, students may miscalculate ( 2 × 10 ) ( 3 × 10 ) as 6 × 10 .
• Some students may in correctly represent their final answer not in scientific notation.
4 5 9
o For example, students may write ( 2 × 10 ) ( 6 × 10 ) as 12 × 10 instead of
10
1 . 2 × 10 .
Strategies to Support Tiered Instruction
28 | Page

===== B1G-M-Grd8-TI · page 29 =====
• Instruction includes making connections to the use of place values when adding and
subtracting numbers written in standard form to place v alues with scientific notation.
• Teacher demonstrates how rewriting numbers in scientific notation utilizing the same
power of 10 represents numbers with the same place value.
• Ins truction includes correct use of operations and laws of exponents when finding the
products and quotients of numbers represented in scientific notation, paying close
attention to the solution to ensure it is in scientific notation.
2 4
o For example, when multiplying ( 3 × 10 ) and ( 4 × 10 ) , students can rearrange
2 4 6
the expression as ( 3 × 4 ) ( 10 × 10 ) to determine 12 × 10 which is equivalent
7
to 1 . 2 × 10 .
• Teacher provides opportunities for students to complete problems using scientific
notation and standard f orm in order to check for the reasonableness of their solutions and
build on connections between the two.
Instructional Tasks
Instructional Task 1 (MTR.3.1, MTR.6.1)
2 2
A collection of meteorites includes three meteorites that weigh 1 . 1 × 10 grams, 6 . 8 × 10
− 2
grams, and 8 . 4 × 10 grams.
Part A. Why would a scientist represent the weights using scientific notation? Are all the
meteorites approximately the same size?
Part B. What is the difference between the mass of the heaviest meteorite and the mass of
the lightest meteorite? Write your answer in standard notation.
Instructional Items
Instructional Item 1
− 8 − 8
What is the sum of 7 × 10 and 6 × 10 ?
Instructional Item 2
Write the expression shown as a number in scientific number.
2 4
( 8 × 10 ) ( 7 . 5 × 10 )
2
5 × 10
*The strategies, tasks and items included in the B1G - M are examples and should not be considered comprehensive.
29 | Page

===== B1G-M-Grd8-TI · page 30 =====
MA.8.NSO.1.6
Benchmark
Solve real - world problems involving operations with numbers expressed in
MA.8.NSO.1.6
scientific notation.
Benchmark Clarifications:
Clarification 1: Instruction includes recognizing the importance of significant digits when physical
measurements are involved.
Clarification 2: Within this benchmark, for addition and subtraction with numbers expressed in scientific
notation, exponents are limited to wi thin 2 of each other.
Connecting Benchmarks/Horizontal Alignment Terms from the K - 12 Glossary
• MA.8. GR.1.2 • S cientific N otation
• S ignificant D igits
Vertical Alignment
Previous Benchmarks Next Benchmarks
• MA.7.NSO.1.1 • MA.9 12.GR.4
• MA.7.NSO.2.1
Purpose and Instructional Strategies
In grade 7, students developed an understanding of Laws of Exponen ts with numerical
expressions. They focused on generating equivalent numerical expressions with whole - number
exponents and rational number bases. In grade 8, students use the knowledge of Laws of
Exponents to work with scientific notation. In Geometry, students will solve problems invol ving
density in terms of area and volume which can be represented using scientific notation when the
numbers are large. Additionally, s tudents can apply their scientific notation knowledge in science
courses.
• Instruction includes opportunities to engage in virtual or physical situations to understand
the importance of significant digits.
• Instruction includes student understanding of the following a spects:
1. zeros at the beginning of a number are never significant,
2. zeros at the end of a number are only significant if there is a decimal point and
3. zeros in the middle of a number are always significant.
• Students should develop fluency with and without t he use of a calculator when
performing operations with numbers expressed in scientific notation.
• For mastery of this benchmark, students are expected to express the product or quotient
with the appropriate number of significant digits. In general, the number of significant
digits in the result will be the least number of digits in the operands.
o For example, when multiplying two numbers together, one t hat has 4 significant
digits and the other that has 2 significant digits, then only two significant digit s
should be retained for the product .
Common Misconceptions or Errors
• Students may incorrectly identify zeros as significant digits.
• Some students may incorrectly apply addition and subtraction across a problem.
3 5 8
o For example, students may miscalculate ( 1 . 3 × 10 ) + ( 3 . 4 × 10 ) as 4 . 7 × 10 .
• Some students may incorrectly apply mul tiplication across a problem.
30 | Page

===== B1G-M-Grd8-TI · page 31 =====
4 5 20
o For example, students may miscalculate ( 2 × 10 ) ( 3 × 10 ) as 6 × 10 .
• Some students may incorrectly represent their final answer not in scientific notation.
4 5 9
o For example, students may write ( 2 . 0 × 10 ) ( 6 . 0 × 10 ) as 12 . 0 × 10 instead
10
of 1.2 × 10 .
Strategies to Support Tiered Instruction
• Instruction includes making connections of a number written in standard form to the
same number written in scientific notation by noticing patterns. Key connections include
recognizing the similarities in the first two digits of both numbers and the connections
between the place value of the number in standard form and the exponent of the power.
• Teacher provides opportunities for students to utilize appropriate calculators and provides
instr uction on the various calculator notations for scientific notation.
• Instruction includes rewriting whole numbers in scientific notation when finding products
or quotients with scientific notation to demonstrate correct use of operations and laws of
exponen ts.
4
o For example, if the student is asked what is five times larger than 2 × 10 , they
should be multiplying 5 × 2 , and not multiply by the exponent.
• Instruction includes making connections to the use of place values when adding and
subtracting numbers written in standard form to place values with scientific notation.
Teacher should demonstrate how rewriting numbers in scientific notation utilizing the
same power of 10 represents numbers with the same place value.
• Instruction includes modeling the correc t use of operations and laws of exponents when
finding the products and quotients of numbers represented in scientific notation, paying
close attention to the solution to ensure it is in scientific notation.
2 4
o For example, when multiplying ( 3 × 10 ) and ( 4 × 10 ) , students can rearrange
2 4 6
the expression as ( 3 × 4 ) ( 10 × 10 ) to determine 12 × 10 which is equivalent
7
to 1 . 2 × 10 .
• Teacher provides opportunities for students to check their work by rewriting numbers in
standard form and applying any necessary operations before com paring their solution to
the solution found with the use of a calculator.
• Instruction includes the use of manipulatives such as Base Ten blocks to make
connections to the purpose of utilizing scientific notation.
o For example, the teacher could pose the qu estion: “What would be the best way
for us to represent 2430 using Base Ten Blocks? We could use 2430 individual
Base Ten Unit blocks, or we could 2 Base Ten Cubes, 4 Base Ten Flats, and 3
Base Ten Rods. Student can then see that it would be easier to repr esent 2430
using the Cubes, Flats, and Rods as opposed to the large amount of individual
Unit blocks. When students see how it would be easier to use the larger blocks to
represent the number, Teachers can explain how it is similar to using scientific
nota tion to write out very large or very small numbers. Instead of writing
18
2873000000000000000 , they can write 2 . 873 × 10 .
• Teacher provides opportunities for students to complete problems using scientific
notation and standard form in order to check for the re asonableness of their solutions and
build on connections between the two.
• Instruction includes the use a three - read strategy. Students read the problem three
different times, e ach with a different purpose (l aminating these questions on a printed
card for s tudents to utilize as a resource in and out of the classroom would be helpful).
31 | Page

===== B1G-M-Grd8-TI · page 32 =====
o First, read the problem with the purpose of answering the question: What is the
problem, context, or story about?
o Second, read the problem with the purpose of answering the que stion: What are
we trying to find out?
o Third, read the problem with the purpose of answering the question: What
information is important in the problem?
Instructional Tasks
Instructional Task 1 (MTR.6.1)
Measures of population density indicate how crowded a place is by giving the approximate
number of people per square unit of area. In 2009, the population of Puerto Rico was
6
approximately 3 . 98 × 10 people.
Part A. How many significant digits are there in the population of Puerto Rico?
Part B. If the population density was about 1000 people per square mile, what is the
approximate area of Puerto Rico in square miles?
Part C. Does the number of significant digits c hange when f inding the population
density? Why or why not?
Instructional Items
Instructional Item 1
7
The Amazon River releases 5 . 5 × 10 gallons of water into the Atlantic Ocean every second.
9
There are about 3 . 2 × 10 seconds in a year. How many gallons are relea sed into the ocean
in one year? Express your answer with the appropriate number of significant digits.
*The strategies, tasks and items included in the B1G - M are examples and should not be considered comprehensive.
32 | Page

===== B1G-M-Grd8-TI · page 33 =====
MA.8.NSO.1.7
Benchmark
Solve multi - step mathematical and real - world problems involving the order of
MA.8.NSO.1.7
operations with rational numbers including exponents and radicals.
2
1 1
3
Example: The expression ( − ) + √ ( 2 + 8 ) is equivalent to + √ 16 which is equivalent to
2 4
1 17
+ 4 which is equivalent to .
4 4
Benchmark Clarifications:
Clarification 1: Multi - step expressions are limited to 6 or fewer steps.
Clarification 2: Within this benchmark, the expectation is to simplify radicals by factoring square roots of
perfect squares up to 225 and cube roots of perfect cubes from - 125 to 125.
Connecti ng Benchmarks/Horizontal Alignment Terms from the K - 12 Glossary
• MA.8.AR.1.1, MA.8.AR.1.2, • E xponents
MA.8.AR.1.3
• R adical
• MA.8.AR.2.1 , MA. 8.AR.2.3
• R ational N umbers
• MA.8.GR.1.1 , MA.8.GR.1.2 ,
MA.8.GR.1.3
Vertical Alignment
Previous Benchmarks Next Benchmarks
• MA.7.NSO.2.1 • MA.912.NSO.1.4
Purpose and Instructional Strategies
In grade 7, students solved mathematical problems using multi - step order of operations with
rational numbers including whole - number exponents and absolute value. In grade 8, students
continue to solve multi - step problems involving the order of operations w ith rational numbers
but including integer exponents and radicals. In Algebra 1 , students will solve problems with
numerical radicals.
• Instruction includes providing a structure for students to track steps as they work through
problems ( MTR.5.1 ). Students should show the equivalence from one step to another to
further their understanding.
• Avoid mnemonics, such as PEMDAS, that do not account for other grouping symbols
and do not exercise proper number sense that allows for calculating accuratel y in a
different order.
• Instruction includes the use of technology to help emphasize the proper use of grouping
symbols for order of operations.
• Students should have experience using technology with radicals, decimals and fractions
as they occur in the re al world. This experience will help to students working with
i rrational numbers in this grade level .
Common Misconceptions or Errors
• Students may confuse square roots with cube roots.
• Some students may incorrectly apply the order of operations. To address this
misconception, be sure to review operations with rational numbers and order of
operations.
• Students may incorrectly perform operations with the numbers in the problem based on
33 | Page

===== B1G-M-Grd8-TI · page 34 =====
wh at has recently been taught, rather than what is most appropriate for a solution. To
address this misconception, have students estimate or predict solutions prior to solving
and then compare those predictions to their actual solution to see if it is reason able
( MTR.6.1 ).
• Students may incorrectly oversimplify a problem by circling the numbers, underlining the
question, boxing in key words, and eliminating important contextual information that
may seem unimportant. This process can cause students to not be a ble to comprehend the
context or the situation ( MTR.2.1, MTR.4.1, MTR.5.1, MTR.7.1 ). Teachers and students
should engage in questions such as:
o What do you know from the problem?
o What is the problem asking you to find?
o Are you putting groups together? Ta king groups apart? Or both?
o Are the groups you are working with the same sizes or different sizes?
o Can you create a visual model to help you understand or see patterns in your
problem?”
Strategies to Support Tiered Instruction
• Teacher provides opportunities for students to comprehend the context or si tuation by
engaging in question s ( l aminating these questions on a printed card for students to utilize
as a resource in and out of the classroom would be helpful).
o What do you know from the problem?
o What is the problem asking you to find?
o Can you create a visual model to help you understand or see patterns in your
problem?
• Instruction includes the use of colors to highlight each step of the process used to
evaluate an expression.
2
1 3
2
o For exam ple, when evaluating ( − ) − √ 2 + 4 students can first highlight the
3
2
1 3
2
grouping with any exponents, roots or parenthesis: ( − ) − 2 + 4 . Then,
√
3
students can determine any order of operations within each of t hose larg er
2
groupings. Students should see that within the cube root, they can perform 2 + 4
2
1 1
3
and that they can perform ( − ) . Students could have the expression − √ 8 , and
3 9
1 17
3
then perform √ 8 to obtain − 2 which is equivalent to − .
9 9
• Instruction includes the use a three - read strategy. Students read the problem three
different times, each with a different purpose ( l aminating these questions on a printed
card for students to utilize as a resource in and out of the classroom would be helpful) .
o First, read the problem with the purpose of answering the question: What is the
problem, context , or story about?
o Second, read the problem with the purpose of answering the question: What are
we trying to find out?
o Third, read the problem with the purpose of answering the question: What
information is important in the problem?
• Teacher has students estimate or predict solutions prior to solving and then compare
those predictions to their actual so lution to see if it is reasonable (MTR.6.1) .
34 | Page

===== B1G-M-Grd8-TI · page 35 =====
Instructional Tasks
Instructional Task 1 (MTR.7.1)
The Dotson’s family was designing their backyard to be a peaceful sanctuary with areas
dedicated to working out, a swimming pool and a gazebo. Each space is a square design
having the same size. The total backyard area is 600 square feet. The Dotson’s want to fence
the outside of their property but will not fenc e what is up against the house. The diagram
below shows the layout of the backyard.
Part A. How much fencing, in feet, would the Dotson’s need to purchase to fence in the
property?
Part B. The Dotson’s went to Fence2Fence and found the following options for purchase:
1
• 3 feet × 6 feet Western Red Cedar Gothic Fence Panels for $60.05
2
1
• 3 feet × 8 feet Western Red Cedar Essentials Fence Panels for $88.66
2
Which option is the better value? Why?
Instructional Items
Instructional Item 1
Calculate th e value of the expression given.
3
2
√
√ 27 − 1 . 4 ( 3 − 5 )
*The strategies, tasks and items included in the B1G - M are examples and should not be considered comprehensive.
35 | Page

===== B1G-M-Grd8-TI · page 36 =====
Algebraic Reasoning
MA. 8 . AR .1 Generate equivalent algebraic expressions.
MA.8.AR.1.1
Benchmark
Apply the Laws of Exponents to generate equivalent algebraic expressions,
MA.8.AR.1.1
limited to integer exponents and monomial bases.
3 − 2 3 9 − 6
Example: The expression ( 3 𝑥 𝑦 ) is equivalent to 27 𝑥 𝑦 .
Benchmark Clarifications:
Clarification 1: Refer to the K - 12 Formulas (Appendix E) for the Laws of Exponents .
Connecting Benchmarks/Horizontal Alignment Terms from the K - 12 Glossary
• MA.8.NSO.1.3 , MA.8.NSO.1.7 • B ase
• E xpression
• I ntegers
• M onomial
Vertical Alignment
Previous Benchmarks Next Benchmarks
• MA.7.NSO.1.1 • MA.912. NSO.1. 2
• MA.7.NSO.2.1
Purpose and Instructional Strategies
In Grade 7, students applied the Laws of Exponents to evaluate and generate numerical
expressions, limited to whole - number exponents and rational number bases. In Grade 8, students
extend their knowledge of the Laws of Exponents to generate equivalent alge braic expressions
with integer exponents and monomial bases. In Algebra 1 , students will use their knowledge of
the Laws of Exponents to generate equivalent algebraic expressions with rational and variable
exponents.
• At the onset of learning about exponents, students learn that it is a way to write expanded
multiplication in a more condensed form. The understanding that the number which is
referred to as the base is multiplied times itself based on the value of the exp onent is
foundational.
• This benchmark can be paired with MA.8.NSO.1.3 which helps students work within
numerical expressions with integer exponents and rational bases. Students should move
from numerical expressions to algebraic expressions to best enhance their conceptual
understanding of the Laws of Exponents.
• A strategy for developing meaning for integer exponents is to make use of patterns as
shown below:
Patterns in Exponents
5
𝑥 𝑥 ∙ 𝑥 ∙ 𝑥 ∙ 𝑥 ∙ 𝑥
4
𝑥 𝑥 ∙ 𝑥 ∙ 𝑥 ∙ 𝑥
3
𝑥 𝑥 ∙ 𝑥 ∙ 𝑥
36 | Page

===== B1G-M-Grd8-TI · page 37 =====
2
𝑥 𝑥 ∙ 𝑥
1
𝑥 𝑥
0
𝑥 1
1
− 1
𝑥
𝑥
1
− 2
𝑥
𝑥 ∙ 𝑥
1
− 3
𝑥
𝑥 ∙ 𝑥 ∙ 𝑥
1
− 4
𝑥
𝑥 ∙ 𝑥 ∙ 𝑥 ∙ 𝑥
1
− 5
𝑥
𝑥 ∙ 𝑥 ∙ 𝑥 ∙ 𝑥 ∙ 𝑥
• Teach one law at a time to allow for conceptual understanding instead of memorizing the
rules. Students should not be told the properties but rather should derive them through
experience and reason. During instruction, include examples that show the expansion of
the bases with the use of the exponents to show equivalence.
• For mastery of this benchmark, monomials can be defined in the following way: a base
may be a product of a coefficient and one or more variables with integer exponents. This
limitation should not prevent students from understanding that a negative exponent can
be represented equivalently as a positive e xponent with the reciprocal base (changing
numerator to denominator or denominator to numerator).
Common Misconceptions or Errors
• When working with negative exponents, students may not understand the connection to
fractions and values in the denominator.
• Students incorrectly multiply the exponent with the base number.
• Students may incorrectly apply the Laws of Exponents.
Strategies to Support Tiered Instruction
• Teachers should review exponents as condensed multiplication and write out expanded
form , and provide opportunities to notice patterns as discussed in MA.8.NSO.1.3.
Teachers can use the “Pattern s in Exponents” char t shown in the Purpo se and
Instructional Strategies section w ith the right - side blank so that students can begin to
complete and understand the patterns of exponents.
• Teachers should re - emphasize the structure of exponents, and how they are used by
multiplying the base by itself the number of times as notated by the exponent .
• Teacher provides a review of the relationship between the base and the exponent by
modeling an example of operatio ns using a base and exponent.
3
o For example, determine the numerical value of 6 .
3
6 which is equivalent to 6 ⋅ 6 ⋅ 6 which is equivalent to 216.
Instructional Tasks
Instructional Task 1 ( MTR.2.1)
37 | Page

===== B1G-M-Grd8-TI · page 38 =====
2 3
Two students were working on generating equivalent expressions for ( 15 𝑥 𝑦 ) , and showed
their solutions below.
Rachel's Answer Justina's Answer
3 6
15 ∙ 15 ∙ 15 ∙ 𝑥 ∙ 𝑥 ∙ 𝑥 ∙ 𝑦 ∙ 𝑦 ∙ 𝑦 ∙ 𝑦 ∙ 𝑦 ∙ 𝑦 3 , 375 𝑥 𝑦
The teacher said Rachel and Justina both have the correct answer. Do you agree with the
teacher? Explain your reasoning.
Instructional Task 2 (MTR.5.1)
− 5 5
Create a pattern using the expanded form of the base, 𝑥 , between 𝑥 and 𝑥 . Explain why
0
𝑥 is equal to 1.
Instructional Items
Instructional Item 1
5 8
Write 𝑥 𝑥 with the variable 𝑥 used only one time.
Instructional Item 2
An expression is given.
3 5
𝑎
( )
− 7
4 𝑏
Write an equivalent expression with only two exponents and no negative exponents.
Instructional Item 3
− 3 − 4
Write 𝑦 𝑧 with only positive exponents.
*The strategies, tasks and items included in the B1G - M are examples and should not be considered comprehensive.
MA.8.AR.1.2
Benchmark
Apply properties of operations to multiply two linear expressions with rational
MA.8.AR.1.2
coefficients.
2
Example: The product of ( 1 . 1 + 𝑥 ) and ( − 2 . 3 𝑥 ) can be expressed as − 2 . 53 𝑥 − 2 . 3 𝑥 or
2
− 2 . 3 𝑥 − 2 . 53 𝑥 .
Benchmark Clarifications:
Clarification 1: Problems are limited to products where at least one of the factors is a monomial.
Clarification 2: Refer to Properties of Operations, Equality and Inequality (Appendix D) .
Connecting Benchmarks/Horizontal Alignment Terms from the K - 12 Glossary
• MA.8.NSO.1.3 , MA.8.NSO.1.7 • C oefficient
• L inear E xpression
• R ational
Vertical Alignment
Previous Benchmarks Next Benchmarks
• MA.7.NSO.1.1 • MA.912.AR.1. 3 , MA.912.AR.1. 4 ,
• MA.7.NSO.2.2 MA.912.AR.1. 7
• MA.7.AR.1.1 , MA.7.AR.1.2
Purpose and Instructional Strategies
38 | Page

===== B1G-M-Grd8-TI · page 39 =====
In grade 7, students applied properties of operations to add and subtract linear expressions with
rational coefficients. Additionally, students determined if two linear expressions were equivalent.
In grade 8, students apply properties of operations to multiply two linear expressions with
rational coefficients. In Algebra 1 , students will add, subtract, multiply and divide polynomial
expressions.
• Instruction includes working with multiplying two linear expressions and connect ing the
distributive property.
• Instruction includes modeling this benchmark concretely. One way to do this is to model
with algebra tiles to generate equivalent expressions.
o For example, 2 ( 𝑥 + 3 ) can be modeled using the algebra tiles to showcase the
eq uivalent expression of 2 𝑥 + 6 .
• Instruction moves from concrete models of examples with integer coefficients to rational
coefficients.
• Instruction includes providing and discussing tasks that involve students analyzing errors
which helps students with the ability to self - correct misconceptions within their own
work.
Common Misconceptions or Errors
• Students may incorrectly apply the distributive property by multiplying the monomial to
only one of the terms in the parentheses. To address this misconception, emphasize that it
is the distributive property of multiplication over addition to help support student
understanding.
• Students may incorrectly apply the rules of integers as they distribute when working with
the operations of negative numbers and applying the distributive property of
multiplication over addition.
• Students may incorrectly change the degree of the variable in order to simplify terms.
39 | Page

===== B1G-M-Grd8-TI · page 40 =====
Strategies to Support Tiered Instruction
• Teacher models examples using the area model for multiplication, showing that the
monomial should be multiplied by each term of the polynomial.
o For example, the area model can be used to determine the product between 45
and 5 is 225 . Once students understand how distribu tion works, teachers re -
introduce variables and solve problems the same way.
40 5
5 200 25
o For example, the area model can be used to determine the product between 𝑥 − 3
and 4 is 4 𝑥 − 12 .
𝑥 − 3
4 4 𝑥 − 12
o For example, the area model can be used to determine the product between 3 𝑦
2 2 3
and 𝑦 + 2 𝑦 is 3 𝑦 + 6 𝑦 .
2
𝑦 + 2 𝑦
2 3
3 𝑦 3 𝑦 + 6 𝑦
• If teachers did not utilize algebra tiles in whole group instruction, algebra tiles could be
used when solving problems using the distributive property. This will help students who
incorrectly distribute the monomial to only one term of the polynomial.
• Tea chers may color code each step of the problem so students can see the progression of
distribution.
o For example, the expression 3 ( 𝑥 + 7 ) is equivalent to 3 𝑥 + 21 .
• Instruction includes emphasizing that it is the distributive property of multiplication over
addition to help support student understanding.
Instructional Tasks
Instructional Task 1 ( MTR.4.1)
1
Students were working on the math problem − 𝑥 ( 4 𝑥 + 8 ) . Kevin’s result is shown in the
2
table below .
Part A. Is Kevin’s answer correct?
Part B. If no, explain his misconception and how he can correct his mistake. If yes,
explain why he is correct and the steps he could have used .
Kevin's Answer
2
− 2 𝑥 + 8
Instructional Task 2 ( MTR.7.1)
40 | Page

===== B1G-M-Grd8-TI · page 41 =====
A rectangle is given below. Note: The figure is not drawn to scale.
Part A. Find the area in terms of 𝑥 .
Part B. If the value of 𝑥 is 4 cm, what is the area of the rectangle in square centimeters?
Instructional Items
Instructional Item 1
An expression is given below.
7 3 5
− 𝑥 ( 𝑥 − )
8 4 6
What is the product of the expression?
Instructional Item 2
Find the product of 0 . 25 𝑥 ( 0 . 55 𝑥 − 0 . 3 ) .
*The strategies, tasks and items included in the B1G - M are examples and should not be considered comprehensive.
MA.8.AR.1.3
Benchmark
Rewrite the sum of two algebraic expressions having a common monomial
MA.8.AR.1.3
factor as a common factor multiplied by the su m of two algebraic expressions.
3 2 2
Example: The expression 99 𝑥 − 11 𝑥 can be rewritten as 11 𝑥 ( 9 − 𝑥 ) or as − 11 𝑥 ( − 9 + 𝑥 ) .
Connecting Benchmarks/Horizontal Alignment Terms from the K - 12 Glossary
• MA.8.NSO.1.7 • M onomial
• MA.8.AR.2.1, MA.8.AR.2.2
Vertical Alignment
Previous Benchmarks Next Benchmarks
• MA.6.NSO.3.2 • MA.912.AR.1. 4 , MA.912.AR.1.7
• MA.7.AR. 1 .1 , MA.7.AR. 1 .2
Purpose and Instructional Strategies
In grade 6, students learned to write the sum of two composite whole numbers that have a
common factor, as a common factor multiplied by the sum of two whole numbers. In grade 7,
students applied the properties of operations to add and subtract linear expr essions with rational
coefficients and determine if two linear expressions are equivalent. In grade 8, students rewrite
the sum of two algebraic expressions having a common monomial factor as a common factor
multiplied by the sum of two algebraic expressio ns. In Algebra 1 , students will extend this
learning to divide a polynomial by a monomial and to rewrite a polynomial expression as a
product of polynomials by using a common factor.
• This benchmark is a foundational benchmark for work with the distributive property and
factoring in more complex problems.
41 | Page

===== B1G-M-Grd8-TI · page 42 =====
• Instruction begins with whole number coefficient s to ensure students understand the
process first. Then, move to rational number values ( MTR.3.1 ).
• Instruction includes a review of common factors of two numbers ( MA.6.NSO.3.2 ) so
students can show understanding of the first step before applying it to the work of this
benchmark.
• Instruction includes a review of the order of operations when working with multi - step
problems ( MTR.3.1 ).
• Instruction includes having expressions with more than one variable.
2
o For example, 24 𝑥 𝑦 + 8 𝑥𝑦 can be rewritten as 8 𝑥𝑦 ( 3 𝑦 + 1 ) .
• Emphasize properties of operations to determine equivalence when rewriting the
expressions. Use manipulatives such as algebra tiles to represent the distributive property
of multiplication over addition (MTR.2.1) .
o Manipulatives
2
3 𝑥 + 6 𝑥
o Area Models
2
3 𝑥 + 6 𝑥
2
3 𝑥 6 𝑥
Common Misconceptions or Errors
• Students may incorrectly apply the rules of integer arithmetic .
• Students may incorrectly apply the Laws of Exponents.
• Students may incorrectly change the degree of a variable in order to simplify terms.
• Students may incorrectly factor out only one of the terms from the parentheses.
3 2
o For example, in 18 𝑥 𝑦 + 3 𝑥 𝑦 , students may incorrectly factor it to
2 2
( )
3 𝑥 𝑦 6 𝑦 + 3 𝑥 𝑦 .
Strategies to Support Tiered Instruction
• When factoring algebraic expressions, the teacher will provide instruction to review the
process for finding greatest common factor (GCF) of two numbers before attempting to
factor algebraic expressions. Once students understand the process of finding factors,
more speci fically the GCF, the teacher will provide instruction on factoring variables
with and without exponents.
• Teacher models how to expand the degrees of variables to better understand what they
truly have in common.
4 2 3
o For example, if the expression was 5 𝑥 𝑦 + 1 0 𝑥 𝑦 , it would be expanded as
5 𝑥𝑥𝑥𝑥𝑦 + 10 𝑥𝑥𝑦𝑦𝑦 . Now that the expression is expanded, students can identify
what variables each term has in common. This example shares two 𝑥 ’s and one 𝑦 .
42 | Page

===== B1G-M-Grd8-TI · page 43 =====
Knowing this, students are able to find the GCF of 5 & 10 , and finish factoring
the expression.
• Instruction includes breaking up expressions to compare similar portions will help
students focus on each step of factoring the algebraic expressions.
2 2
o For example, when factoring 36 𝑥 𝑦 + 42 𝑥 𝑦 , the expression shoul d be broken
2 2
up to factor as 36 & 42 , 𝑥 & 𝑥 , 𝑦 & 𝑦 .
• Once students understand how to factor each portion of the expression individually,
teachers model how to “remove” the common factor from each portion of the expression,
and how to use what is left over.
Instructional Tasks
Instructional Task 1 (MTR.2.1)
Tammy is designing seating around a new f ire pit for her outdoor patio. One of the fire pit
3 1
designs is a regular octagon with a side length of 𝑥 − . The other design is a regular
4 4
hexagon with a side length of 12 − 𝑥 .
Part A . Find the perimeter of the regular octagon fire pit.
Part B. Find the perimeter of the regular hexagon fire pit.
Part C. Write an expression with the fewest number of terms to show the difference
between the perimeters of the two fire pits.
Part D. Rewri te an equivalent expression from Part C as a common factor multiplied by
the sum of two algebraic expressions.
Instructional Items
Instructional Item 1
For each expression shown, d etermine an equivalent expression written as a common factor
multiplied by the sum of two algebraic expressions.
2
a. 125 𝑥 + 15 𝑥
3
b. − 24 − 36 𝑦
3 1
2 3
c. 𝑥𝑦 − 𝑥 𝑦
4 4
*The strategies, tasks and items included in the B1G - M are examples and should not be considered comprehensive.
43 | Page

===== B1G-M-Grd8-TI · page 44 =====
MA. 8 . AR . 2 Solve multi - step one - variable equations and inequalities.
MA.8.AR.2.1
Benchmark
Solve multi - step linear equations in one variable, with rational number
MA.8.AR.2.1
coefficients. Include equations with variables on both sides.
Benchmark Clarifications:
Clarification 1: Problem types include examples of one - variable linear equations that generate one
solution, infinitely many solutions or no solution.
Connecting Benchmarks/Horizontal Alignment Terms from the K - 12 Glossary
• MA.8.NSO.1.7 • C oefficient
• MA.8.AR.1.3 • L inear E quation
• MA.8.AR. 3 • R ational N umber
• MA.8.AR.4
• MA.8.GR.1.4, MA.8.GR.1.5
Vertical Alignment
Previous Benchmarks Next Benchmarks
• MA.7.AR.2.1 • MA.912.AR.2.1
Purpose and Instructional Strategies
In grade 7, students wrote and solved two - step equations in one variable within a mathematical
or real - world context, where all terms are rational numbers. In grade 8, students solve multi - step
linear equations in one variable, with rational number coefficients, including equations with
variables on both sides. In Algebra 1, students will write and solve linear equations in one
var iable in a real - world context, with rational number coefficients.
• In this benchmark, students work with linear equations, which is foundation al for the
work with both linear equations and nonlinear equations throughout all future
mathematics courses.
• Instruction includes the use of manipulatives, drawings, models, properties of operations
and properties of equality.
o A lgebra T iles
o B alance
• Problem types involve multi - step problems that require the use of the distributive
property, combining like terms, and variables on both sides of the equation.
44 | Page

===== B1G-M-Grd8-TI · page 45 =====
• Since there are variables on both sides of the equation, instruction includes discovering
that one - variable equations can result in three possible solution sets. The possible
solutions are one solution, no solution or infinitely many solutions. This benchmark
provides a foundation for MA.8.AR.4 when students are working with systems of
equations and two - variable equations.
Common Misconceptions or Errors
• Students may incorrectly apply the distributive property by multiplying the monomial to
only one of the terms in the parentheses. To address this misconception, emphasize that it
is the distributive property of multiplication over addition to help support student
understanding.
• Students may incorrectly apply the rules of integer arithmetic as they distribute when
working with the operations of negative numbers and applying the distributive property
of multiplication over addition.
• Students may incorrectly t hink that you will always need a variable that equals a constant
as a solution. To address this misconception, provide examples that show a constant
equal to a variable as a solution, a constant equal to a constant or a non - valid equality
statement.
Strategies to Support Tiered Instruction
• Teacher provides opportunities to use manipulatives to demonstrate using the distributive
property as repeated addition of the given expression.
o For example the expression 3 ( 𝑥 − 4 ) can be represented as adding ( 𝑥 − 4 ) three
times together.
• Instruction includes support with relating that if the solution is in the form 𝑥 = 𝑎 , there is
only one solution. If the solution is in the form 𝑎 = 𝑎 , there are infinitely many
solutions. If the solution is in the form 𝑎 = 𝑏 , where a and b are different numbers, there
are no solutions. Teacher co - creates a graphic organizer with examples of one, no
solutions, and infinitely many solutions. Demonstrate using substitution to help students
make sense of the solutions.
• Teacher co - creates an anchor chart for multiplying negative integers for students that
incorrectly apply the rules of negative integers as they distribute .
• Teacher provides examples for students that need additional su pport for distributive
property by using the area model (like the one shown below).
2 ( 𝑥 + 4 )
𝑥 4
2 2 𝑥 8
2 ( 𝑥 + 4 ) = ( 𝑥 + 4 ) + ( 𝑥 + 4 ) = 2 𝑥 + 8
• Instruction includes emphasizing that it is the distributive property of multiplication over
addition to help support student understanding.
Instructional Tasks
Instructional Task 1 (MTR.1.1, MTR.4.1)
45 | Page

===== B1G-M-Grd8-TI · page 46 =====
Part A. How many solutions does the equation, 2 𝑦 + 7 = 7 + 2 𝑦 have? Explain your
reasoning to another student and justify your answer.
Part B. How ma ny solutions does the equation, 2 ( 𝑦 + 3 ) + 1 = 2 ( 3 . 5 + 𝑦 ) have? Explain
your reasoning to another student and justify your ans wer.
Part C. What do you notice about the equations in Part A and Part B?
Instructional Task 2 (MTR.1.1, MTR.4.1)
For each equation, state whether there is no solution, one solution, or infinitely many
solutions. Explain your reasoning.
Equation Number of Solutions Explanation
1 1
𝑥 − 6 = ( 𝑥 − 3 ) − 1
3 3
2 𝑥 + 7 = − 2 𝑥 + 7
0 . 8 𝑥 + 1 . 4 = 0 . 8 𝑥
Instructional Items
Instructional Item 1
Solve for 𝑥 :
a. − 3 . 5 ( 10 𝑥 − 2 ) = − 176 . 75
b. 15 ( 2 𝑥 − 10 ) + 4 𝑥 = − 3 ( 15 𝑥 + 4 )
*The strategies, tasks and items included in the B1G - M are examples and should not be considered comprehensive.
46 | Page

===== B1G-M-Grd8-TI · page 47 =====
MA.8.AR.2.2
Benchmark
Solve two - step linear inequalities in one variable and represent solutions
MA.8.AR.2.2
algebraically and graphically.
Benchmark Clarifications:
Clarification 1: Instruction includes inequalities in the forms 𝑝𝑥 ± 𝑞 > 𝑟 and 𝑝 ( 𝑥 ± 𝑞 ) > 𝑟 , where 𝑝 , 𝑞
and 𝑟 are specific rational numbers and where any inequality symbol can be represented.
Clarification 2: Problems include inequalities where the variable may be on either side of the inequality.
Connecting Benchmarks/Horizontal Alignment Terms from the K - 12 Glossary
• MA.8.AR. 1.3 • Coefficient
• MA.8.GR.1.3 • Linear expression
• Rational Number
Vertical Alignment
Previous Benchmarks Next Benchmarks
• MA.7.AR.2.2 • MA.912.AR.2. 6 , MA.912.AR.2. 7,
MA.912.AR.2.8
Purpose and Instructional Strategies
In grade 7, students wrote and solved one - step inequalities in one variable within a mathematical
context and represented solutions algebraically or graphically. In grade 8, students solve two - step
linear inequalities in one variable and represent solution s algebraically and graphically. In
Algebra 1 , students will extend this learning to write and solve one - variable linear inequalities,
including compound inequalities representing solutions algebraically or graphically.
Additionally, students will write an d solve two - variable linear inequalities to represent
relationships between quantities from a graph or a written description within a mathematical or
real - world context.
• Instruction emphasizes the p roperties of inequality with connections to the propertie s of
equality ( MTR.5.1 ).
• Instruction includes showing why the inequality symbol reverses when multiplying or
dividing both sides of an inequality by a negative number .
o For example, if the inequality 6 > − 7 is multiplied by − 3 , it results in − 18 > 21
which is a false statement. The inequality symbol must be reversed in order to
keep a true statement. Since 6 is to the right of - 7 on the number line and
multiplying by a negative number reverses directions, 6 ( − 3 ) will be to the left of
− 7 ( − 3 ) on the num ber line.
• Instruction includes cases where the variable is on the right side of the inequality.
• Variables are not limited to 𝑥 ; instruction includes using a variety of lowercase letters for
their variables, however 𝑜 , 𝑖 , and 𝑙 should be avoided as the y too closely resemble zero
and one.
• Instruction emphasizes the understanding of defining an algebraic inequality. Students
should have practice with inequalities in the form of 𝑝𝑥 ± 𝑞 > 𝑟 , 𝑝𝑥 ± 𝑞 < 𝑟 , 𝑝𝑥 ± 𝑞 ≥
𝑟 and 𝑝𝑥 ± 𝑞 ≤ 𝑟 . Students should explore how "is greater than or equal to" and "is
strictly greater tha n" are similar and different as well as "is less than or equal to" and "is
strictly less than." Students should use academic language when describing the algebraic
inequality.
47 | Page

===== B1G-M-Grd8-TI · page 48 =====
Common Misconceptions or Errors
• Students may confuse when to use an open versus closed circle when graphing an
inequality. Emphasize the inclusion ( ≤ and ≥ ) versus non - inclusion ( < and > ) of that
value as a viable solution and provide problems that motivate reasoning with different
ranges of possible values for the variable.
• Some students are unable to see the difference between the multiplication or division
property of equality and the m ultiplication or division property of inequality.
• Students may misunderstand the direction the inequality symbol is pointing is always the
direction they shade on the number line. To address this misconception, emphasize
reading the inequality sentence alo ud and use numerical examples to test for viable
solutions (MTR.6.1) .
Strategies to Support Tiered Instruction
• Instruction includes the use of real - world inequality problems to help students determine
when to use an open versus closed circle when graphing an inequality. Teacher facilitates
discussion around whether various solutions make sense by having students graph all
possible solutions on a number line and then deciding if the solutions make sense in the
context of the problem.
o For example, He nry has up to $20 to spend at the football game and the dance
after the game. He must buy a dance ticket for $13 and can spend the rest on hot
dog and drink combinations at the football game for $2 per combo. After Henry
buys his dance ticket, how many hot dog and drink combinations could Henry
purchase?
Students can write the inequality 2 𝑐 + 13 ≤ 20 to represent the situation.
Students should get the algebraic solution as 𝑐 ≤ 3 . 5 , however, within the context
of the problem the possible solutions are 0, 1, 2 o r 3.
• Teacher models solving an equation and its corresponding inequality. Teacher facilitates
discussion about the similarities and differences, paying close attention to cases when
multiplying or dividing with negative values and using substitution to ve rify the
solutions.
• Instruction includes using substitution to test possible solutions to determine the correct
direction to shade on the number line.
• Teacher provides opportunities for students to use manipulatives for solving inequalities.
When using manipulatives, ensure students use the appropriate inequality symbol, rather
than an equal sign.
• Instruction includes emphasizing reading the inequality sentence aloud and use numerical
examples to test for viable solutions.
48 | Page

===== B1G-M-Grd8-TI · page 49 =====
Instructional Tasks
Instructional Task 1 (MTR.7.1)
As a social media employee, Rick is paid $100 a week plus $5 for every person that he adds
to the website. This week, Rick wan ts his pay to be at least $200.
Part A. Write and solve an inequality for the number of sales Rick needs to make.
Part B. Graph the solution on a number line.
Part C. Describe what the solutions mean within the context of the problem.
Instructional Task 2 (MTR.4.1, MTR.7.1)
At his job, Jake earns $7.50 per hour. He also earns a $55 bonus every month. Jake needs to
earn at least $235 every month.
Part A. Jake determines that the inequality 7 . 50ℎ + 55 ≥ 235 can be used to calculate
the number of hours he needs to work each month. Explain why the symbol ≥ is
used within the inequality.
Part B. Solve and graph the solution set for the number of hours Jake needs to work each
month.
Instructional Items
Instructional Item 1
Represent the solutions to the inequality 550 + 8 𝑏 > 925 graphically .
Instructional Item 2
Solve and graph the inequality − 225 ≤ 320 − 0 . 5 𝑥 .
*The strategies, tasks and items included in the B1G - M are examples and should not be considered comprehensive.
MA.8.AR.2.3
Benchmark
2 3
Given an equation in the form of 𝑥 = 𝑝 and 𝑥 = 𝑞 , where 𝑝 is a whole
MA.8.AR.2.3
number and 𝑞 is an integer, determine the real solutions.
Benchmark Clarifications:
2
Clarification 1: Instruction focuses on understanding that when solving 𝑥 = 𝑝 , there is both a positive
and negative solution.
Clarification 2: Within this benchmark, the expectation is to calculate square roots of perfect squares up
to 225 and cube roots of perfect cubes from - 125 to 125.
Connecting Benchmarks/Horizontal Alignment Terms from the K - 12 Glossary
• MA.8.NSO.1. 2, MA.8.NSO.1.7 • I nteger
• MA. 8.GR.1.1 , MA.8.GR.1.2 • R eal N umbers
Vertical Alignment
Previous Benchmarks Next Benchmarks
• MA. 7.AR.2.2 • MA.912.AR. 3.1
Purpose and Instructional Strategies
In grade 7, students wrote and solve d two - step equations in one variable. In grade 8, when given
2 3
an equation in the form 𝑥 = 𝑝 and 𝑥 = 𝑞 , where 𝑝 is a whole number and 𝑞 is an integer,
49 | Page

===== B1G-M-Grd8-TI · page 50 =====
students determine the real solutions. In Algebra 1 , students will write and solve quadratic
equations.
• This benchmark involves students understanding the concepts of how to square a number
and find the square root as well as how to cube a number and find the cube root.
• Students should recognize that squaring a number and taking the square root of a number
are inverse operations, therefore, cubing a number and taking the cube root are inverse
operations as well. Students should use this understanding to solve equations containing
square or cube numbers.
• In finding the square root, instruction involves discu ssion that there is both a positive and
negative solution. Instruction can include relating the lengths of the sides of a square for
square root and the length of the side of a cube to cube roots.
2
• Within this benchmark, it is not the expectation that stu dents are required to isolate the 𝑥
3
term or the 𝑥 term when solving an equation.
Common Misconceptions or Errors
• Students may incorrectly conclude that squaring a number means to multiply by 2.
Likewise, cubing may be mistaken as multiplying by 3. Use length to show doubling and
area of a square to show an exponent of 2. Use of two - dimensional and three -
dimensional manipulatives ( MTR.2.1 ) may also help to emphasize squares and cubes
versus increasing length.
• Students may think that since a negative number has no square root in the real number
system, then a negative number has no cube root in the real number system.
Strategies to Support Tiered Instruction
• Instruction includes modeling the differences between doubling and squaring a value
using a graphic organizer. Doubling a value would be represented by multiplying a
given length by 2 whereas squaring a number would be represented by the area of a
square w ith a given length.
o For example, students can be given the table below to show how the left column
doubles a length whereas the right column squares a length.
Given length of 5 Given length of 5
2
Representing 5 ∙ 2 Representing 5
• Instruction includes modeling the differences between tripling or cubing a value using a
graphic organizer. Tripling a value would be represented by multiplying a given length
by 3 whereas cubing a number would be represented by the volume of a cube with a
given length.
o For example, students can be given the table below to show how the left column
triples a length whereas the right column cubes a length.
Given length of 5 Given length of 5
50 | Page

===== B1G-M-Grd8-TI · page 51 =====
3
Representing 5 ∙ 3 Representing 5
• Instruction may include providing students with the opportunity to develop their own
note sheet or graphic organizer for the cubes of numbers from - 5 to 5.
𝟐 𝟑
𝒙 𝒙 𝒙
− 5 25 − 125
− 4 16 − 64
− 3 9 − 27
− 2 4 − 8
− 1 1 − 1
0 0 0
1 1 1
2 4 8
3 9 27
4 16 64
5 25 125
51 | Page

===== B1G-M-Grd8-TI · page 52 =====
Instructional Tasks
Instructional Task 1 (MTR.7.1)
A square tile in a kitchen has an area of 121 square inches.
Part A. What is the length of one side of the square tile in inches? Is this tile smaller or
larger than a one foot by one foot tile?
Part B. The owner of the house, Kiana , wants to put larger tile in their kitchen to change
the look of the kitchen. The new ti le is a square with an area of 196 square inches.
o What is the length of the side of the new tile?
o How does this larger tile compare to the current tile used in the kitchen?
Part C. A third tile has a side length of 2 √ 11 . Kiana is trying to determine which squ are
tile covers the most area. Put the tiles side lengths in order from greatest to least.
Justify your thinking.
Instructional Task 2 (MTR.3.1)
The volume of a large cube is 125 cubic inches. The volume of a small cube i s 27 cubic
inches. What is the difference between the length of one side of the large cube and the length
of one side of the small cube?
Instructional Items
Instructional Item 1
An equation is given.
2
𝑥 = 49
What are the values of 𝑥 ?
Instructional Item 2
3
Solve for 𝑏 in the equation − 64 = 𝑏 .
*The strategies, tasks and items included in the B1G - M are examples and should not be considered comprehensive.
52 | Page

===== B1G-M-Grd8-TI · page 53 =====
MA. 8 . AR . 3 Extend understanding of proportional relationships to two - variable linear
equations.
MA.8.AR.3.1
Benchmark
MA.8.AR.3.1 Determine if a linear relationship is also a proportional relationship.
Benchmark Clarifications:
Clarification 1: Instruction focuses on the understanding that proportional relationships are linear
relationships whose graph passes through the origin.
Clarification 2: Instruction includes the representation of relationships using tables, graphs, equations and
written descriptions.
Connecting Benchmarks/Horizontal Alignment Terms from the K - 12 Glossary
• MA.8.AR.2.1 • C onstant of P roportionality
• MA.8.F.1.2 • P roportional R elationship
• MA.8.DP.1.3
Vertical Alignment
Previous Benchmarks Next Benchmarks
• MA.7.AR.4.1 • MA.912.AR.2.2
Purpose and Instructional Strategies
In grade 7, students determined if two quantities are in a proportional relationship from a table
and determined the constant of proportionality. In grade 8, students determine whether a given
linear relationship is also a proportional relationship . In Algebra 1 , students will use two - variable
linear equations to represent mathematical or real - world context s .
• Instruction includes using a variety of variables to represent the slope, which is the same
as the constant of proportionality when the linear relationship is also a proportional
relationship. Students used 𝑝 or 𝑘 in grade 7 to represent the constant of proportionality
and now in grade 8 may use 𝑚 to represent slope. Students should understand that the
slope or constant rate of change can be represented by any variable.
• Instruction includes students graphing relationships and writing equations to deter mine if
two linearly related quantities are also in a proportional. Students need to be provided
examples to show evidence that not all linear relationships are proportional.
• Students should connect unit rates, the constant of proportionality and slope i n order to
represent similar ideas in different contexts .
Common Misconceptions or Errors
• Students may incorrectly state a relationship is not proportional if the origin is not visible
in the graph or given in the table.
• Students may incorrectly think all linear relationships are proportional. Some students
find a constant rat e of change and confuse this with a constant ratio . Help students
understand that a constant ratio is only possible if the relationship pass es through the
origin .
Strategies to Support Tiered Instruction
• Instruction includes providing opportunities to explore relationships represented on
graphs and in tables that do not include the origin. Students should determine the rate of
53 | Page

===== B1G-M-Grd8-TI · page 54 =====
change in these situations and use ratio reasoning to determine if the relationships pass
through the origin or not.
• Instruction includes the use of geometric software to visually compare proportional and
non - proportional graphs to model that all linear graphs are not proportional relationships.
• Teacher c o - creates a graphic organizer to represent the similarities and differences of the
terms: unit rate, constant of proportionality, and slo pe. Specifically include the different
contexts applicable to each.
Instructional Tasks
Instructional Task 1 ( MTR.4.1, MTR.6.1, MTR.7.1)
A student is making trail mix for each serving size in the table given .
Serving Size 1 2 3 4
Cups of Nuts 2 3 4 5
Cups of Fruit 4 6 8 10
Part A . Is this relationship linear? If so, state the constant rate of change.
Part B. Determine if this relationship is also proportional.
Part C. What do you notice about the number of cups of nuts and fruit that would be in a
serving size of zero? Discuss with a partner.
Instructional Task 2 (MTR.4.1)
Part A. Write the two - variable equation that represents each graph.
Part B. Which graph represents a proportional relationship? Justify your answer.
Graph #1 Graph #2
Instructional Items
Instructional Item 1
Alexia earns $14.75 an hour as a hostess at a local restaurant. She earns an additional $30 in
tips each night from take - out orders. Determine if this linear relationship is proportional.
Instructional Item 2
The circumference of a circle is proportional to its diameter. This relationship can be
expressed by the equation 𝐶 = 𝜋𝑑 . Determine if this linear relationship is proportional.
*The strategies, tasks and items included in the B1G - M are examples and shou ld not be considered comprehensive.
MA.8.AR.3.2
Benchmark
54 | Page

===== B1G-M-Grd8-TI · page 55 =====
Given a table, graph or written description of a linear relationship, determine
MA.8.AR.3.2
the slope.
Benchmark Clarifications:
Clarification 1: Problem types include cases where two points are given to determine the slope.
Clarification 2: Instruction includes making connections of slope to the constant of proportionality and to
similar triangles represented on the coordinate plane.
Connecting Benchmarks/Horizontal Alignment Terms from the K - 12 Glossary
• MA.8.AR.2.1 • S lope
• MA.8.F.1.1
• MA.8.DP.1.3
Vertical Alignment
Previous Benchmarks Next Benchmarks
• MA.7.AR.4.2 • MA.912.AR.2.2
Purpose and Instructional Strategies
In grade 7, students determined the constant of proportionality in a proportional relationship . In
grade 8, students are determining the slope of a linear relationship from a given table, graph, or
written relationship. In Algebra 1 , students will write a two - variable linear equation from a
graph, written description , or a table to represent relationships between quantities in
mathematical and real - world context.
• Students identified the unit rate or the constant of proportionality in prior grade levels.
This benchmark is the first one that references the slope , whi ch represents a constant rate
of change, and this is not the same as a constant of proportionality unless the relationship
go es through the origin.
• Instruction includes interpreting the mea ning and value of slope in real - world context.
• Understanding sl ope can be introduced through a graph and the change in value of the 𝑦
and the 𝑥 .
• To introduce the concept to students, use at least two points on a graph in quadrant one.
• Instruction includes using a variety of vocabulary to make connections to real - world
concepts and future courses. To describe the slope, one can say either “the vertical
change divided by the horizontal change” or “rise over run.”
• Students should have exp erience utilizing a slope formula to determine the slope between
two points on a line.
𝑦 1 − 𝑦 2
o Slope of a line can be found by the expression 𝑚 = , where ( 𝑥 , 𝑦 ) and
1 1
𝑥 − 𝑥
1 2
( 𝑥 , 𝑦 ) are two different points on the line.
2 2
Common Misconceptions or Errors
• Students may invert the 𝑥 - and 𝑦 - values when calculating slope. To address this
misconception, students should represent the relationship visually.
Strategies to Support Tiered Instruction
• Teacher supports students who invert the 𝑥 - and 𝑦 - values when calculating slope by
using real - world problems that students can relate to and helping students represent the
relationship visually.
55 | Page

===== B1G-M-Grd8-TI · page 56 =====
• Instruction includes providing students with graph paper with grid lengths larger than 1
centimeter and using appropriate scaling of the axes to allow for students to see the unit
rate more easily.
Instructional Tasks
Instructional Task 1 (MTR.6.1)
Mr. Elliot needs to drain his above ground pool before the winter. The graph below
represents the relationship between the number of gallons of water remaining in the pool and
the number of hours that the pool has drained. Determine the slope and explain w hat it means
in this situation.
Instructional Task 2 (MTR.4.1, MTR.7.1)
Jack and Jill are selling gallons of water that are sold in different size pails . Jack charges
$ 1.75 for every 2 gallons of water a pail holds. Additionally, he charges a $2 serv ice fee.
J ill's prices can be modeled with the graph shown .
Price (in dollars)
Gallons of Water
Part A . Identify the slope of Jack's relationship. Explain what it means.
Part B. Identify the slope of Jill's graph and explain what it means.
Part C. Graph Jack’s prices on the same graph as Jill.
Part D . Whose has the better deal, Jack or Jill? Explain.
Instructional Items
Instructional Item 1
A linear relationship is given in the table below . Determine the slope of the relationship.
𝒙 − 1 0 1 2 3
𝒚 − 18 − 9 0 9 18
56 | Page

===== B1G-M-Grd8-TI · page 57 =====
*The strategies, tasks and items included in the B1G - M are examples and should not be considered comprehensive.
MA.8.AR.3.3
Benchmark
Given a table, graph or written description of a linear relationship, write an
MA.8.AR.3.3
equation in slope - intercept form.
Connecting Benchmarks/Horizontal Alignment Terms from the K - 12 Glossary
• MA.8.AR.2.1 • I ntercept
• MA.8.F.1.1 • S lope
• MA.8.DP.1 .3
Vertical Alignment
Previous Benchmarks Next Benchmarks
• MA.7.AR.4. 4 • MA.912.AR.2. 2 , MA.912.AR.2.3
Purpose and Instructional Strategies
In grade 7, students translated between different representations of proportional relationships . In
grade 8, students write an equation in slope - intercept form from a written description, a table, or
a graph . In Algebra 1 , students write a linear two - variable equation to represent a relationship
given by a variety of mathematical and real - world contex ts.
• Point - slope form and standard forms are not expectations at this grade level.
• Instruction connects proportional relationships to support the generation of the equation
𝑦 = 𝑚𝑥 + 𝑏 . Helping students see how the linear equation is both the same and different
from the proportional relationship will support the appropriate use of proportional
thinking using the rate of change.
• Using an online dynamic graphing tool to explore how the g raph changes as either the
slope or the 𝑦 - intercept changes helps students visualize the coefficients and constants in
the equation ( MTR.4.1 ).
• Students should recognize in a table that the 𝑦 - intercept is the 𝑦 - value when 𝑥 is equal to
0. The slope can be determined by finding the ratio between the change in two 𝑦 - values
and the change between the two corresponding 𝑥 - values.
• Using graphs, students identify the 𝑦 - intercept as the point where the line crosses the 𝑦 -
axis and the slope as the vertical change divided by the horizontal change. In a linear
equation, the coefficient of 𝑥 is the slope and the constant is the 𝑦 - intercept. Students
need to be given the equations in formats other than 𝑦 = 𝑚𝑥 + 𝑏 , such as 𝑦 = 𝑎𝑥 + 𝑏 or
𝑦 = 𝑏 + 𝑚𝑥 .
• Instruct ion includes using a variety of vocabulary to make connections to real - world
concepts and future courses. To describe the slope, one can say either “the vertical
change divided by the horizontal change” or “rise over run.”
• The instruction includes example s where the slope is positive or negative and the 𝑦 -
intercept is given as a positive or a negative in the equation.
• When providing a graph, be sure there are easily identifiable points for students to use in
calculating the s lope .
• Instruction allows students to make connections between the different representations of
57 | Page

===== B1G-M-Grd8-TI · page 58 =====
a linear relationship ( MTR.2.1 ).
Common Misconceptions or Errors
• Students may incorrectly identify the values for the slope and 𝑦 - intercept.
• Students may incorrectly calculate the slope with a common error of inverting the change
in 𝑦 and the change in 𝑥 .
Strategies to Support Tiered Instruction
• Teacher supports students who incorrectly identify the values for the slope and 𝑦 -
intercept by providing opportunities to notice patterns between a given value for 𝑏 , a line
graphed on the coordinate plane, and a given equation of the same line.
• Teacher supports students who incorrectly calculate the slope by inverting the change in
𝑦 − 𝑦
1 2
𝑦 and the change in 𝑥 using error analysis tasks, in which the expression is
𝑥 − 𝑥
1 2
𝑥 − 𝑥
1 2
incorrectly written as , and has students find and correct the error .
𝑦 − 𝑦
1 2
• Teacher supports students who invert the 𝑥 and 𝑦 values when calculating slope by using
real - world problems that students can relate to and helping students represent the
relationship visually.
• Teacher co - creates an anchor chart naming the s lope and 𝑦 - intercept of a given line and
then discusses where to start when graphing the line.
• Instruction incudes graphing various linear equations from a table and then discussing the
pattern students notice in regard to the 𝑦 - intercept.
• Teacher provid es students with graphs and equations of several linear equations then co -
illustrates connections between the slopes and 𝑦 - intercepts of each line to the
corresponding parts of each equation using the same color highlights.
• Teacher co - creates a graphic organizer with students to include examples of positive and
neg ative slope; the meaning of each variable in slope intercept form ; and how to
determine the slope and 𝑦 - intercept in a table, graph and verbal description.
58 | Page

===== B1G-M-Grd8-TI · page 59 =====
Instructional Tasks
Instructional Task 1 (MTR.7.1)
Victoria owns a store that sells board games. She made the following graph to relate the
number of board games she sells to her overall profits.
Part A. Write an equation in slope - intercept form to describe this relation. Explain how to
determine the equation.
P art B. What is the meaning of the 𝑦 - intercept in the given context? What is the meaning
of the slope in the given context?
Instructional Items
Instructional Item 1
W rite an equation that represents the graph shown .
Instructional Item 2
The table shown represents a linear relationship. Using the table, write an equation in slope -
intercept form.
𝒙 𝒚
0 − 4
1 − 1
2 2
3 5
*The strategies, tasks and items included in the B1G - M are examples and should not be considered comprehensive.
59 | Page

===== B1G-M-Grd8-TI · page 60 =====
MA.8.AR.3.4
Benchmark
Given a mathematical or real - world context, graph a two - variable linear
MA.8.AR.3.4 equation from a written description, a table or an equation in slope - intercept
form.
Connecting Benchmarks/Horizontal Alignment Terms from the K - 12 Glossary
• MA.8.AR.2.1 • I ntercept
• MA.8.AR.4.2, MA.8.AR.4.3 • L inear E quation
• MA.8.DP.1 .3 • S lope
Vertical Alignment
Previous Benchmarks Next Benchmarks
• MA.7.AR.4. 3 • MA.912.AR.2.4
Purpose and Instructional Strategies
In grade 7, students graphed proportional relationships from a table, equa tion or a written
description. In grade 8, students graph an equation from slope - intercept form from a written
description, a table, a graph or an equation. In Algebra 1 , students will graph a linear function
when given a table, equation or written description.
• Point - slope form and sta ndard forms are not expectations at this grade level.
• Review the concept of slope from MA.8.AR.3.2 for students who may need additional
work to determine the slope and understand the meaning of slope.
• The instruction includes examples where the slope is p ositive or negative and the 𝑦 -
intercept is given as a positive or a negative in the equation.
• When introducing the benchmark, review graphing on the coordinate plane and
determining appropriate scales for the graph.
• Instruction includes the understanding that a real - world context can be represented by a
linear two - variable equation even though it only has meaning for discrete values.
Discussing discrete values will prepare students to represent domain and range of rea l -
world contexts in later courses.
o For example, if a gym membership cost $10.00 plus $6.00 for each class, this can
be represented as 𝑦 = 10 + 6 𝑐 . When represented on the coordinate plane, the
relationship is graphed using the points ( 0 , 10 ) , ( 1 , 16 ) , ( 2 , 22 ) , and so on.
• For mastery of this benchmark, students should be given flexibility to represent real -
world contexts with discrete values as a line or as a set of points.
Common Misconceptions or Errors
• Students may incorrectly identify the slope and 𝑦 - intercept.
• When graphing, students may incorrectly graph the line by inverting the direction s of the
slope value s .
2
o For example, if the slope is , a student may think that 2 represents the change in
3
the horizontal direction rather than the vertical direction.
Strategies to Support Tiered Instruction
• Teacher supports students who incorrectly identify the values for the slope and 𝑦 -
intercept by providing opportunities to notice patterns between a given value for 𝑏 , a line
graphed on the coordinate plane, and a given equation of the same line.
60 | Page

===== B1G-M-Grd8-TI · page 61 =====
• Teacher supports students who invert the 𝑥 - and 𝑦 - values when calculating slope by
using real - world problems that students can relate to and helping students represent the
relationship visually.
• Instruction includes supporting students who incorrectly g raph the line by inverting the
directions of the slope values. Students may incorrectly calculate the slope with a
common error of inverting the change in 𝑦 and the change in 𝑥 . Teachers can support
𝑦 1 − 𝑦 2
students using error analysis tasks, in which the expre ssion is incorrectly written as
𝑥 − 𝑥
1 2
𝑥 1 − 𝑥 2
.
𝑦 − 𝑦
1 2
• Instruction includes having students find the error and make corrections.
• Teacher supports students who incorrectly graph the slope of a given line through error
analysis tasks, in which a line is incorrectly graphed by inverting the change in 𝑦 and the
change in 𝑥 and then have students find and correct the error.
• Teacher co - creates an anchor chart naming the slope and 𝑦 - intercept of a given line and
then discusses where to start when graphing the line.
• Teacher provides graphs and equations of several linear equations then co - illustrates
connections between the slopes and 𝑦 - intercepts of each line to the corresponding parts
of each equation using the same color highlights.
• Teacher co - creates a graphic organizer with students to include examples of positive and
negative slope ; the meaning of each variable in slope intercept form; and how to
determine the slope and 𝑦 - intercept in a table, graph and verbal description.
• Teacher provides instruction on creating an equation table to clear up the misconception
of incorrectly graphing an equation on a coordinate plane.
Coordinate
𝒙 𝒚 = 𝟐𝒙 + 𝟓 𝒚
Points
0 5
𝑦 = 2 ( 0 ) + 5 ( 0 , 5 )
𝑦 = 0 + 5
𝑦 = 5
- 2 𝑦 = 2 ( − 2 ) + 5 1 ( − 2 , 1 )
𝑦 = − 4 + 5
𝑦 = 1
6 𝑦 = 2 ( 6 ) + 5 17 ( 6 , 17 )
𝑦 = 12 + 5
𝑦 = 17
• Teacher provides instruction on determining the slope and 𝑦 - intercept when reading
verbal description.
61 | Page

===== B1G-M-Grd8-TI · page 62 =====
Instructional Tasks
Instructional Task 1 (MTR.6.1, MTR.7.1)
Brent wants to buy a 60" LED Smart TV. He opened a savings account and added money to
the account every month. The table below shows the relationship between the number of
months Brent has bee n saving and the total amount of money in his account.
Part A . Graph the relationship on a coordinate plane.
Part B . If the new Smart TV costs $1500 and tax will be $110, approximately how many
more months does he need to save money in order to make the purchase?
Instructional Task 2 (MTR.3.1, MTR.4.1)
Part A. Graph 𝑦 = . 25 𝑥 − 3 . 5 on the coordinate plane.
Part B. Discuss with a partner your method of graphing the equation of the line.
Instructional Items
Instructional Item 1
Graph 𝑦 = 𝑥 − 2 on the coordinate plane.
Instructional Item 2
Supplies for the car wash cost $25. The booster club is charging $10 per car. Graph the
relationship between the amount of money earned and the number of cars washed.
Instructional Item 3
The table shown represents a linear relationship. Use the table to graph the relationship .
𝒙 𝒚
− 1 2
0 0
1 − 2
2 − 4
*The strategies, tasks and items included in the B1G - M are examples and should not be considered comprehensive.
62 | Page

===== B1G-M-Grd8-TI · page 63 =====
MA.8.AR.3.5
Benchmark
Given a real - world context, determine and interpret the slope and 𝑦 - intercept
MA.8.AR.3.5 of a two - variable linear equation from a written description, a table, a graph or
an equation in slope - intercept form.
Example: Raul bought a palm tree to plant at his house. He records the growth over many months
and creates the equation ℎ = 0 . 21 𝑚 + 4 . 9 , where ℎ is the height of the palm tree in
feet and 𝑚 is the number of months. Interpret the slope and 𝑦 - intercept from his
equat ion.
Benchmark Clarifications:
Clarification 1: Problems include conversions with temperature and equations of lines of fit in scatter
plots.
Connecting Benchmarks/Horizontal Alignment Terms from the K - 12 Glossary
• MA.8.AR.2.1 • I ntercept
• MA,8.AR.4.1, MA.8.AR.4.2, • L inear Equation
MA.8.AR.4.3
• S lope
• MA.8.F.1.3
• MA.8.DP.1 .3
Vertical Alignment
Previous Benchmarks Next Benchmarks
• MA.7.AR.4.5 • MA.912.AR.2. 5
• MA.912.F.1.5
Purpose and Instructional Strategies
In grade 7, students solve d real - world problems involving proportional relationships . In grade 8,
students interpret the slope and 𝑦 - intercept of a two - variable linear equation within a real - world
context when given a written description, a table, a graph or an equation . In Algebra 1 , students
will solve mathematical and real - world problems that are modeled by linear functions, and will
interpret key features of the graph in terms of the context.
• The purpose of this benchmark is to focus on interpreting the slope and 𝑦 - intercept in a
real - world context using information from a table, graph or written description.
• Students identify the rate of change (slope) and initial value ( 𝑦 - intercept) from tables,
graphs, equations or verbal descriptions. Students recognize that if the value 𝑥 = 0 is in
a table , the 𝑦 - intercept is the corresponding 𝑦 - value. Otherwise, the 𝑦 - intercept can be
found by substituting a point and the slope into the slope - intercept form of the equation
and solving for the 𝑦 - intercept. The slope can be determined by finding the ratio between
the change in two 𝑦 - values and the change between the two - correspon ding 𝑥 - values.
• Using graphs, students identify the 𝑦 - intercept as the point where the line crosses the 𝑦 -
axis and the slope as the vertical change divided by the horizontal change. In a linear
equation, the coefficient of 𝑥 is the slope and the consta nt is the 𝑦 - intercept. Students
should have practice with equations in formats other than 𝑦 = 𝑚𝑥 + 𝑏 , such as 𝑦 = 𝑎𝑥 +
𝑏 or 𝑦 = 𝑏 + 𝑚𝑥 .
• Instruction includes using a variety of vocabulary to make connections to real - world
concepts and future courses. To describe the slope, one can say either “the vertical
63 | Page

===== B1G-M-Grd8-TI · page 64 =====
change divided by the horizontal change” or “rise over run.”
• In contextual situations, the 𝑦 - intercept is generally the starting value or the value in the
situation when the independent variable is 0.
• The slope is the rate of change that occurs in the problem. Rates of change can often
occur over years. In these situations it is helpful for the years to be "converted" to the
number of years since the start year.
o For example, the years of 1960, 1970, and 1980 could be represented as 0 for
1960 , 10 for 1970 and 20 for 1980 .
• Students use the slope and 𝑦 - intercept to write a linear function in the form 𝑦 = 𝑚𝑥 + 𝑏 .
• Students should remember to interpret the line of fit within the context of the data
provided by the scatter plot ( MA.8.DP.1.3 ). The line of fit is meant to understand the
general trend of data, but it might not be able to explain everything about it.
• For mastery of this benchmark, it is not the expectation to compare slopes or 𝑦 - intercepts
of two linear equations in two variables.
• Instruction includes learning about linear relationships within other content areas.
Students should recognize that the conversion between Fahrenheit and Celsius represent s
a linear relationship , but not a proportional one . Memorization of the formulas is not an
expectation of the benchmark.
5
o The formula for converting Fahrenheit to Celsius is: 𝐶 = ( 𝐹 − 32 ) .
9
9
o The formula for converting Celsius to Fahrenheit is: 𝐹 = 𝐶 + 32 .
5
Common Misconceptions or Errors
• Students may incorrectly identify the slope and 𝑦 - intercept.
• Students may incorrectly interpret the slope and 𝑦 - intercept.
• The misconceptions of this benchmark may develop for some students based on the real -
world context of t he problems presented. To address this misconception, scaffold
questions to help students understand the context.
Strategies to Support Tiered Instruction
• Teacher supports students who incorrectly identify the values for the slope and 𝑦 -
intercept by providing opportunities for students to notice patterns between a given value
for 𝑏 , a line graphed on the coordinate plane, and a given equation of the same l ine.
• Teacher supports students who incorrectly calculate the slope by inverting the change in
𝑦 − 𝑦
1 2
𝑦 and the change in 𝑥 using error analysis tasks, in which the expression is
𝑥 1 − 𝑥 2
𝑥 − 𝑥
1 2
incorrectly written as , and have students find and co rrect the error.
𝑦 1 − 𝑦 2
• Teacher co - creates an anchor chart naming the slope and 𝑦 - intercept of a given line and
then discusses where to start when graphing the line.
• Teacher provides graphs and equations of several linear equations then co - illustrates
con nections between the slopes and 𝑦 - intercepts of each line to the corresponding parts
of each equation using the same color highlights.
• Instruction includes utilizing a three - read strategy. Students read the problem three
different times, each with a different purpose.
o First, read the problem with the purpose of answering the question: What is the
problem, context, or story about?
64 | Page

===== B1G-M-Grd8-TI · page 65 =====
o Second, read the problem with the purpose of answering the question: What are
we trying to find out?
o Third, r ead the problem with the purpose of answering the question: What
information is important in the problem?
Instructional Tasks
Instructional Task 1 (MTR.7.1)
The graph below shows a scatter plot and its line of fit for data collected on the height and
foot length of a sample of 10 male students.
Part A. What does the graph indicate about the relationship between foot length and
height?
Part B. The equation of the line of fit is 𝑓 = 1 . 5 ℎ – 4 . 3 , where 𝑓 is foot length in
millimeters and ℎ is height in centimeters. Explain the meaning of the slope and
the 𝑓 - intercept of this equation in the context of the data.
Instructional Items
Instructional Item 1
At Stay - a - While Coffee shop, they display their internet fees on a char t like the one shown
below. Determine the slope for the relationship between the number of minutes, 𝑥 , and the
amount charged, 𝑦 .
Time Amount Charged
1 hour $ 3.95
2 hours $ 6.95
4 hours $ 12.95
Instructional Item 2
Joshua adopted a puppy from a dog shelter. He records the puppy’s height over many months
𝑚
and creates the equation ℎ = + 3 , where ℎ is the height of the puppy, in feet, and 𝑚 is the
5
number of months. Interpret the slope and ℎ - intercept from his equation.
*The strategies, tasks and items included in the B1G - M are examples and should not be considered comprehensive.
65 | Page

===== B1G-M-Grd8-TI · page 66 =====
MA. 8 . AR . 4 Develop an understanding of two - variable systems of equations.
MA.8.AR.4.1
Benchmark
Given a system of two linear equations and a specified set of possible
MA.8.AR.4.1
solutions, determine which ordered pairs satisfy the system of linear equations.
Benchmark Clarifications:
Clarification 1: Instruction focuses on the understanding that a solution to a system of equations satisfies
both linear equations simultaneously.
Connecting Benchmarks/Horizontal Alignment Terms from the K - 12 Glossary
• MA.8.AR. 2.1 • L inear E quation
• MA.8.AR.3.5
Vertical Alignment
Previous Benchmarks Next Benchmarks
• MA.7.AR.4 .2, MA.7.AR.4.3 • MA.912.AR.9.1
Purpose and Instructional Strategies
In grade 7, students determined constants of proportionality and graphed proportional
relationships from a table, equation or a written description given in a mathematical or real -
world context. In grade 8, students extend this learning to systems of two l inear equations to
determine possible solutions from a specified set of ordered pairs. In Algebra 1 , students will
write and solve a system of two - variable linear equations algebraically and graphically given a
mathematical or real - world context.
• The focu s of this benchmark is on the understanding that the solution of a system is a set
of points that satisfy both equations of the system.
• Systems of linear equations can have one solution, infinitely many solutions or no
solutions.
o A system of linear equa tions whose graphs meet at one point (intersecting lines)
has only one solution, the ordered pair representing the point of intersection.
o A system of linear equations whose graphs are coincident (the same line) has
infinitely many solutions, the set of o rdered pairs representing all the points on the
line.
o A system of linear equations whose graphs do not meet (parallel lines) has no
solutions and the slopes of these lines are the same. The technical name for these
kinds of systems is "inconsistent".
One Solution Infinitely Many Solutions No Solution
• A system of linear equations is two linear equations that should be solved at the same
time.
66 | Page

===== B1G-M-Grd8-TI · page 67 =====
• Instruction includes understanding that systems are on the same coordinate plane to
determine solutions ( MTR.4.1 ).
Common Misconceptions or Errors
• Students may incorrectly substitute solutions into the equations. To address this
misconception, remediate work with integers.
• Students may not understand how a pair of values can be a single solution to a pair of
equations. Emphasize the connection betw een the two variables in the equations and the
two coordinates of the point on the coordinate plane.
Strategies to Support Tiered Instruction
• Instruction includes drawing connections between systems of equations represented
graphically and with equations. Using a graphic organizer, reinforce the solution to a
system of equation as the ordered pair that satisfies both equations simultaneously.
o W hen there is one solution, the two lines intersect at one point and when using
substitution, the coordinates of that one point will result in true statements for
both equations.
o When there is no solution, the two lines do not intersect and therefore there are no
coordinates that will result in true statements for both equations.
o When there are infinite solutions, the two lines coincide and intersect with an
infinite number of points. When using substitution, all the points on the lines will
results in true statements for both equations.
• Teacher provides opportunities to utilize manipulatives when substituting values into
given equations in order to help visualize evaluating operations with integers.
o 4 + 3 , both positive, sum is positive. When the signs a re the same the counters
would be the same color, so add them.
o − 4 + 3 , different signs, more negative counters, the sum is negative.
o − 4 + ( − 3 ) , both negative signs, the sum is negative.
o 4 + ( − 3 ) , different signs, more positive counters, the sum is positive .
• Teacher provides scaffolding opportunities by first having students identify which value
in each ordered pair represents the 𝑥 - coordinate and which represents the 𝑦 - coordinate.
Once students correctly identify the coordinates, the teacher provides opportunities to use
substitution to replace the variables in the provided equations with the correct value.
Finally, students evaluate each equation to determine if the provided coordinates result in
true statements or not.
• Instruction includes r emediating work with integers for students that incorrectly
substitute solutions into the equations.
67 | Page

===== B1G-M-Grd8-TI · page 68 =====
Instructional Tasks
Instructional Task 1 (MTR.7.1, MTR 6.1)
The students in Mr. Cruz's Algebra class were determining the solution of a system of
equations and determined what they believe are possible solutions. When Mr. Cruz checked
their solutions, each of the students had a different set of points. Determine which student
has the correct solution and explain why the other student's ans wers are not correct.
System of Equations
3 9 4 12
𝑦 = 𝑥 − 𝑦 = − 𝑥 +
5 5 5 5
Justin’s Answer Belinda’s Answer Olivia’s Answer
(8,3) (3,0) (8, - 4)
Instructional Items
Instructional Item 1
Determine which of the following points are a solution(s) of the given system of equations .
2 𝑥 − 8 = 𝑦 − 𝑥 + 1 = 𝑦
a. ( 2 , 2 )
b. ( 3 , 2 )
c. ( 0 , 2 )
d. ( 3 , − 2 )
e. ( 3 , 3 )
*The strategies, tasks and items included in the B1G - M are examples and should not be considered comprehensive.
MA.8.AR.4.2
Benchmark
Given a system of two linear equations represented graphically on the same
MA.8.AR.4.2 coordinate plane, determine whether there is one solution, no solution or
infinitely many solutions.
Connecting Benchmarks/Horizontal Alignment Terms from the K - 12 Glossary
• MA.8.AR. 2.1 • L inear E quation
• MA.8.AR. 3.4, MA.8.AR.3.5
Vertical Alignment
Previous Benchmarks Next Benchmarks
• MA.7.AR.4.3 , MA.7.AR.4.4 , • MA.912.AR.9.1 , MA.912.AR.9.4
MA.7.AR.4.5
68 | Page

===== B1G-M-Grd8-TI · page 69 =====
Purpose and Instructional Strategies
In grade 7, students determined constants of proportionality and graphed proportional
relationships from a table, equation or a written description given in a mathematical or real -
world context. In grade 8, students extend this learning to a system of two linear equations
represented graphically on the same coordinate plane then students will determine whether there
is one solution, no solution or infinitely many solutions. In high school, students will write and
solve a system of two - variable linear equati ons algebraically and graphically given a
mathematical or real - world context.
• The focus of this benchmark is on the understanding that the solution of a system is a set
of points that satisfy both equations of the system.
• Systems of linear equations can have one solution, infinitely many solutions or no
solutions.
o A system of linear equations whose graphs meet at one point (intersecting lines)
has only one solution, the ordered pair representing the point of intersection.
o A system of linear equations whose graphs are coincident (the same line) has
infinitely many solutions, the set of ordered pairs representing all the points on the
line.
o A system of linear equations whose graphs do not meet (parallel lines) has no
solutions and the slopes of these lin es are the same. The technical name for these
kinds of systems is "inconsistent.”
One Solution Infinitely Many Solutions No Solution
• A system of linear equations is two linear equations that should be solved at the same
time.
• Instruction includes understanding that systems are on the same coordinate plane to
determine solutions ( MTR.4.1 ).
Common Misconceptions or Errors
• Students may incorrectly interpret the solution when the lines are the same and have an
infinite number of solutions. To address this misconception, provide multiple examples to
show how the equations and graphs will be the same line on the coordinate plan e.
69 | Page

===== B1G-M-Grd8-TI · page 70 =====
Strategies to Support Tiered Instruction
• Instruction includes testing possible solutions for a given system of linear equations to
demonstrate whether the equations have the same solution set, one common solution
(only one ordered pair) or no common solution .
• Instruction includes drawing connections between systems of equations represented
graphically and with equations. Using a graphic organizer, reinforce the solution to a
system of equation as the ordered pair that stratifies both equations simultaneously.
o When there is one solution, the two lines intersect at one point and when using
substitution, the coordinates of that one point will result in true statements for
both equations.
o When there is no solution, the two lines do not intersect an d therefore there are no
coordinates that will result in true statements for both equations.
• When there are infinite solutions , the two lines coincide and intersect with an infinite
number of points. When using substitution, all the points on the lines wil l results in true
statements for both equations.
Instructional Tasks
Instructional Task 1 (MTR.6.1)
Ashley looks at the following system of equations. She concludes that because there is no 𝑦 -
intercept value, the lines cannot intersect.
1 1
𝑦 = − 𝑥 𝑦 = 𝑥
2 3
Part A . Graph the system of equations on a coordinate plane.
Part B. Is Ashley's conc lusion correct? Explain your answer and support your reasoning
with mathematical examples.
Instructional Task 2 (MTR.3.1)
Part A. Identify the solution of the graphed system of equations. Explain why it is the
solution.
Part B. Identify the solution of the graphed system of equations. Explain how you know it is
the solution. What conjecture can you make about parallel lines?
Instructional Items
70 | Page

===== B1G-M-Grd8-TI · page 71 =====
Instructional Item 1
Determine the number of solutions of each graphed system of linear equations, A, B and C.
System A System B System C
System A System B
System C
*The strategies, tasks and items included in the B1G - M are examples and should not be considered comprehensive.
MA.8.AR.4.3
Benchmark
Given a mathematical or real - world context, solve systems of two linear
MA.8.AR.4.3
equations by graphing.
Benchmark Clarifications:
Clarification 1: Instruction includes approximating non - integer solutions.
Clarification 2: Within this benchmark, it is the expectation to represent systems of linear equations in
slope - intercept form only.
Clarification 3: I nstruction includes recognizing that parallel lines have the same slope.
Connecting Benchmarks/Horizontal Alignment Terms from the K - 12 Glossary
• MA.8.AR. 2.1 • L inear E quation
• MA.8.AR. 3.4, MA.8.AR.3.5
Vertical Alignment
Previous Benchmarks Next Benchmarks
• MA.912.AR.9.1 , MA.912.AR.9. 6
71 | Page

===== B1G-M-Grd8-TI · page 72 =====
• MA.7.AR.4.3 , MA.7.AR.4.4 ,
MA.7.AR.4.5
Purpose and Instructional Strategies
In grade 7, students determined constants of proportionality and graphed proportional
relationships from a table, equation or a written description given in a mathematical or real -
world context. In grade 8, students extend this learning to a sys tem of two linear equations and
graphing the system on the same coordinate plane then students may determine whether there is
one solution, no solution or infinitely many solutions. In Algebra 1 , students will write and solve
a system of two - variable linear equations algebraically and graphically given a mathematical or
real - world context.
• Systems of linear equations can have one solution, infinitely many solutions or no
solutions.
o A system of linear equations whose graphs meet at one point (intersecting lines)
has o nly one solution, the ordered pair representing the point of intersection.
o A system of linear equations whose graphs are coincident (the same line) has
infinitely many solutions, the set of ordered pairs representing all the points on
the line.
o A system of linear equations whose graphs do not meet (parallel lines) has no
solutions and the slopes of these lines are the same. The technical name for these
kinds of systems is "inconsistent.”
One Solution Infinitely Many Solutions No Solution
• A system of linear equations is two linear equations that shou ld be solved at the same
time. Instruction includes understanding that systems are on the same coordinate plane to
determine solutions ( MTR.4.1 ).
• The purpose of this benchmark is to focus on g raphing to solve the system of equations.
This allows for the visual representation of what the solution means in context
( MTR.7.1 ).
• Instruction includes recognizing when the system does not have a solution: if the re are
two distinct lines, but the slopes of the two lines are the same , then the resul t is a pair of
parallel lines. This could be modeled on a graph on paper or through an online resource
to support students being able to visualize the lines.
72 | Page

===== B1G-M-Grd8-TI · page 73 =====
Common Misconceptions or Errors
• Students make errors in plotting points and graphing lines on the coordinate plane,
leading to incorrect solutions. To address this misconception, use graph paper, a printed
coordinate plane or an online tool for graphing .
• Students incorrectly identify th e solution to equations of the same line by stating only the
graphed points are the solution set.
o For example, in the system below with the infinitely many solutions, students
m ay incorrectly not identify ( 7 , 9 ) as a solution because it is not a point gra phed
on the coordinate plane.
Strategies to Support Tiered Instruction
• Instruction includes the use of graph paper, a printed coordinate plane, or an online tool
for graphing.
• Teacher provides opportunities for students to comprehend the context or situation by
engaging in questions.
o What do you know from the problem?
o What is the problem asking you to find?
o Can you create a visual model to help you understand or see patterns in your
problem?
• Instruction includes drawing connections between systems of equations represented
graphically and with equations. Using a graphic orga nizer, reinforce the solution to a
system of equation as the ordered pair that satisfies both equations simultaneously.
o When there is one solution, the two lines intersect at one point and when using
substitution, the coordinates of that one point will result in true statements for
both equations.
o When there is no solution, the two lines do not intersect and therefore there are no
coordinates that will result in true statements for both equations.
o When there are infinite solutions, the two lines coi ncide and intersect with an
infinite number of points. When using substitution, all the points on the lines will
results in true statements for both equations.
• Instruction includes the use of a three - read strategy. Students read the problem three
different times, each with a different purpose.
o First, read the problem with the purpose of answering the question: What is the
problem, context, or story about?
o Second , read the problem with the purpose of answering the question: What are
we trying to find out?
o Third, read the problem with the purpose of answering the question: What
information is important in the problem?
73 | Page

===== B1G-M-Grd8-TI · page 74 =====
Instructional Tasks
Instructional Task 1 (MTR.6.1)
Part A. Graph the line 𝑦 = 2 𝑥 + 2 . 5 on a coordinate plane. Draw two other lines with the
same slope but different 𝑦 - intercepts.
Part B . Compare the lines graphed in part A. What do you notice about the other two lines
when compared to the given line?
Instructional Items
Instructional Item 1
Solve the system of linear equations by graphing .
𝑦 = 𝑥 + 5 𝑦 = 3 𝑥 − 3
Instructional Item 2
Solve the system of linear equations by graphing.
3
𝑦 = − 𝑥 + 5 𝑦 = − 4 𝑥 − 2
4
Instructional Item 3
Solve the system of linear equations by graphing.
𝑦 = 2 𝑥 + 6 𝑦 = 2 𝑥 – 4 . 2
Instructional Item 4
Solve the system of linear equations by graphing.
𝑦 = − 0 . 5 𝑥 + 2 𝑦 = 4 . 5 𝑥 − 5
*The strategies, tasks and items included in the B1G - M are examples and should not be considered comprehensive.
74 | Page

===== B1G-M-Grd8-TI · page 75 =====
Functions
MA. 8 . F .1 Define, evaluate and compare functions.
MA.8.F.1.1
Benchmark
Given a set of ordered pairs, a table, a graph or mapping diagram, determine
MA.8.F.1.1 whether the relationship is a function. Identify the domain and range of the
relation.
Benchmark Clarifications:
Clarif ication 1: Instruction includes referring to the input as the independent variable and the output as
the dependent variable.
Clarification 2: Within this benchmark, it is the expectation to represent domain and range as a list of
numbers or as an inequality.
Connecting Benchmarks/Horizontal Alignment Terms from the K - 12 Glossary
• MA.8.AR.3.2, MA.8.AR.3.3 • D omain
• F unction
• R ange
Vertical Alignment
Previous Benchmarks Next Benchmarks
• MA.7.AR.4.1, MA.7.AR.4.2 , • MA.912.F.1.1 , MA.912.F.1.2
MA.7.AR.4.3
Purpose and Instructional Strategies
In grade 7, students determined whether two quantities have a proportional relationship by
examining a table, graph or written description and they determined the constant of
proportionality. In grade 8, students work with linear equations with two variabl es and begin the
introduction of functions. In Algebra 1 , students will classify the function type and represent it
using function notation.
• A mapping diagram consists of a list of 𝑥 - values and their corresponding 𝑦 - values shown
with an arrow.
o An examp le of a mapping diagram can include domain and range values or 𝑥 - and
𝑦 - values.
• The “vertical line test” should be treated with caution because (1) it allows you to apply a
rule without thinking and (2) it may create misconceptions for later ma thematics.
• Vocabulary is important in this benchmark as it connects to future learning related to
domain and range.
• Students should explain how they verified if the given context was a function or non -
function ( MTR.4.1 ). Students should provide counterexamples to deepen their knowledge
of the relationships in functions.
75 | Page

===== B1G-M-Grd8-TI · page 76 =====
o For example, students can be asked to create 𝑥 - and 𝑦 - values that create relations
that are functions and non - functions.
Functions Non - Functions
( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( )
4 , 12 , 5 , 15 , 6 , 18 , 7 , 21 , ( 8 , 24 ) 4 , 12 , 4 , 15 , 5 , 18 , 5 , 21 , ( 6 , 24 )
• Domain and range can be shown as a list, an inequality or as a verbal description
depending on how the relation is given . The inequalities can be represented as inclusive
or non - inclusive as determined by the context.
o For example, if a graph represents a real - world context, with non - negative values,
with the equation 𝑦 = 6 𝑥 + 5 , the domain and range can be described as below.
▪ List
A list cannot be used to represent this relation because it has infinitely
many values.
▪ Inequality
Domain: 𝑥 ≥ 0 ; Range: 𝑦 ≥ 5
▪ Verbal Description
The domain is all real numbers that are greater than or equal to zero. The
range is all real numbers that are greater than or equal to five.
o For example, for the relation { ( 4 , 12 ) , ( 5 , 15 ) , ( 6 , 18 ) , ( 7 , 21 ) , ( 8 , 24 ) } , the
domain and range can be described as below.
▪ List
Domain: {4, 5, 6, 7, 8}; Range: {12, 15, 18, 21, 24}
▪ Inequality
An inequality, such as 4 ≤ 𝑥 ≤ 8 , cannot be used to represent this relation
because it is based on a discrete set of values.
▪ Verbal Description
The domain is all whole numbers from four to eight, inclusive . The range
is the multiples of three from 12 to 24, inclusive .
Common Miscon ceptions or Errors
• Students may invert the terms inde pendent and dependent variable. To address this
misconception, focus on the vocabulary and relationship to the input and output.
Strategies to Support Tiered Instruction
76 | Page

===== B1G-M-Grd8-TI · page 77 =====
• Teacher reviews vocabulary and the difference between the terms. Once students
understand that independent variables represent the input of the relation , they can make
sense of real - world problems to accurately identify independent and dependent variables.
o For example, in a scientific experiment one can determine that input as the
variable that is controlled by the scientist. So the independent variable is the one
that is controlled in the experiment and the dependent is the result of the
experiment.
• Teacher creates a matching activity with real - world situations. Students match dependent
variable and the independent variable for the situation. Teacher facilitates discussion
among students on their reasoning behind their matches from the activity in order to clear
up any lingering misconceptions.
• Instruction includes helping stude nts see how no number within the domain is repeated
when the relationship is a function.
Instructional Tasks
Instructional Task 1 (MTR.4.1)
A relation is shown below where 𝑥 represents the independent variable and 𝑦 represents the
dependent variable.
1 1
( ) ( ) ( )
3 , 4 , − 2 , 3 , 7 , 1 , ( − , 4 ) , ( − 2 , )
2 2
Part A. Create a mapping diagram, table and graph to represent this relation.
Part B. Determine the domain and range of the relation.
Part C. Determine if the relation represents a function or does not represent a function
and justify your decision.
Part D. If the relation is not a function, which point could be removed to make it a
function? If it is a function, add a point that would no longer make it a function.
Instructional Items
Instructional Item 1
A relation is shown in the table below where 𝑥 represents the independent variable and 𝑦
represents the dependent variable. Decide whether the table can represent a function or
cannot represent a function.
𝒙 𝒚
4 12
- 1 - 3
0 - 4
- 5 - 21
1 - 3
4 12
- 2 0
Instructional Item 2
Identify the do main and range for the relation { ( 3 , 8 ) , ( 2 , 3 ) , ( 1 , 0 ) , ( 0 , − 1 ) , ( − 1 , 0 ) } .
*The strategies, tasks and items included in the B1G - M are examples and should not be considered comprehensive.
MA.8.F.1.2
77 | Page

===== B1G-M-Grd8-TI · page 78 =====
Benchmark
Given a function defined by a graph or an equation, determine whether the
MA.8.F.1.2 function is a linear function. Given an input - output table, determine whether it
could represent a linear function.
Benchmark Clarifications:
Clarification 1: Instruction includes recognizing that a table may not determine a function.
Connecting Benchmarks/Horizontal Alignment Terms from the K - 12 Glossary
• MA.8.AR.3.1 • F unction
• L inear F unction
Vertical Alignment
Previous Benchmarks Next Benchmarks
• MA.7.AR.4. 1 • MA.912.F.1.1 , MA.912.F.1. 6
Purpose and Instructional Strategies
In grade 7, students determined whether a relationship was proportional, given a table, eq uation
or written description. In grade 8, students determine whether the function defined by a graph or
an equation is a linear function. In Algebra 1 , students will classify the function type given an
equation or graph and compare key features of linear and nonlinear functions.
• Instru ction includes determining if the function has a constant rate of change between the
𝑥 - and 𝑦 - values.
o For example, students can depict the rate of change between the values in a table
like below.
• Instruction includes a focus on the connection between the equation and the graph.
• Students should develop an understanding of a linear function by using examples and
non - examples.
Examples Non - Examples
78 | Page

===== B1G-M-Grd8-TI · page 79 =====
2
𝑦 = 2 𝑥 + 5 𝑦 = 2 𝑥 + 5
𝑦 = 9 𝑥 = 9
1 1
3
𝑦 = 𝑥 𝑦 = 𝑥
2 2
2 𝑦 − 3 = 8 2 𝑥 − 3 = 8
Common Misconceptions or Errors
• Students may not understand the connection from a table to the visual of a graph of the
same function. To address this misconception, provide opportunities for students to make
connections and see the graph and table side by side.
Strategies to Support Tiered Instruction
• Teacher models how to get from a set of points displayed on a table to the points graphed
on a coordinate plane, and how points from a coordinate plan can be written in a table.
Then, teacher provides opportunities to notice any patterns in the graph or ta ble that will
help identify if the function is linear.
• Teacher co - constructs a graph from a table with students, as well as a table from a graph
to increase understanding of the relationship between the two. Once students become
comfortable moving between graphs and tables, students can begin inspecting tables that
represent functions. Teachers can review proportional and linear relationships and work
with students to dissect tables to find if they contain a proportional relationship, meaning
they are linea r. Students should note that not all linear relationships are proportional, but
all proportional relationships are linear.
• Teacher provides opportunities for students to make connections and see the graph and
table of the same function side by side.
Instructional Tasks
Instructional Task 1 (MTR.6.1)
The area, 𝐴 , of an isosceles right triangle is a function of the length of its legs, 𝑠 , and is
2
represented by the equation 𝐴 = 0 . 5 𝑠 .
Part A. Create a table of values to represent this function.
Part B. Plot the points on a coordinate plane.
Part C. What is the domain and range of the function?
Part D. Is this function linear or nonlinear? Explain and justify your answer.
79 | Page

===== B1G-M-Grd8-TI · page 80 =====
Instructional Task 2 (MTR.2.1)
Part A. Create a table that could represent a linear function.
Part B. Create a table that could represent a non - linear function.
Part C. Compare your table from Part B with a partner.
Instructional Items
Instructional Item 1
Taro and Jiro climbed a mountain and hiked back down. At the summit and at every station
along the way back down, they recorded their altitude and the amount of time they had been
travelling. Can the data in the table represent a linear function?
Time Travelled (in minutes) Altitude (in meters)
0 3776
1
3600
29
3
126 3020
1
179 2700
3
231 2390
Instructional Item 2
Does the graph below represent a linear function? If so, justify your answer.
*The strategies, tasks and items included in the B1G - M are examples and should not be considered comprehensive.
MA.8.F.1.3
Benchmark
Analyze a real - world written description or graphical representation of a
MA.8.F.1.3 functional relationship between two quantities and identify where the function
is increasing, decreasing or constant.
Benchmark Clarifications:
Clarification 1: Problem types are limited to continuous functions.
Clarification 2: Analysis includes writing a description of a graphical representation or sketching a graph
from a written description.
Connecting Benchmarks/Horizontal Alignment Terms from the K - 12 Glossary
• MA.8. AR. 3.5 • F unction
Vertical Alignment
Previous Benchmarks Next Benchmarks
80 | Page

===== B1G-M-Grd8-TI · page 81 =====
• MA.7.AR.4 .2 • MA.912.F.1.5, MA.912.F.1.6
Purpose and Instructional Strategies
In grade 7, students determine d one of the key features of a proportional relationship , its constant
of proportionality, from its graph . In grade 8, students determine where a function is increasing
or decreasing from its graph. In Algebra 1 , students will compare key features of linear and
nonlinear functions represented algebraically, graphically, in tables or written descriptions.
• Graphs can be described many ways. Using knowledge of functions, equations, and
graphs, students should be able to describe a graph in words and should be able to draw a
graph if given a qualitative description.
• When working with graphs, instruction incl udes students reasoning through asking
questions such as:
o Do e s the graph represent a function?
o Does the graph show increase, decrease, both, or neither?
o Are there intervals of the domain in which the graph shows that the function
increase s , decrease s , or stay s constant?
o Does the graph represent a linear function ?
o What is the (approximate) slope of a given interval within the graph?
• Students should be given opportunities to analyze graphs individually and with others
( MTR.4.1 ).
• When sketching a graph based on a written description, students may use curved or
straight lines to represent portions of increase or decrease based on the description.
• Problems where students are creating a graph are note expected to differentiate between
line ar and nonlinear functions to represent the written description.
o For example, if the description has a rapid increase, a student can sketch a curve
that increases rapidly or a straight line with a steep slope.
o For example, in grade 8 students are not exp ected to recognize curves that
represent exponential growth or decay.
Common Misconceptions or Errors
• Students may invert domain and range.
• Students may incorrectly describe increasing, decreasing or constant intervals using
elements outside of the domain.
81 | Page

===== B1G-M-Grd8-TI · page 82 =====
Strategies to Support Tiered Instruction
• Teacher reviews vocabulary and the difference between the terms. Once students
understand that domain represents the input variable (independent var iable) , they can
make sense of real - world problems to accurately identify domain and range.
• Teacher poses qu estions to encourage discourse to gain information about graphs.
Students have the opportunity to discuss what they see and know from the graph and
have the ability to make inferences about its description.
• Instruction includes providing real - world situati ons and having the students identify
domain and range for the situation, giving justification as to their reasoning. Students can
create their own situation and identify the domain and range for their situation.
• Teacher provides examples of different chara cteristics of graphs. Once students can
identify basic attributes of the graphs, they can begin to reason through more specific
questions about each graph.
o For example, describing if the graph is increasing or decreasing, if the graph is a
linear function, if the graph is a function, what is the slope of the graph (if linear),
etc.
• Instruction includes creating an anchor chart with students describing increasing,
decreasing, or constant graph.
Instructional Tasks
Instructional Task 1 (MTR.6.1)
The graph describes the number of bacteria in a culture over time.
Describe in detail the relationship between the number of bacteria in the culture and time.
Include where it is increasing, decreasing or remaining constant.
Instructional Items
Instructional Item 1
Sketch a graph of the representation described below.
Madison is studying the growth of bacteria in food and learned it has four phases. Label the
axes and show a gra ph of the four stages, assuming an initial bacterium count of 50.
Phase 1 : No growth in the number of cells for the first hour.
Phase 2 : Rapid growth in the number of bacteria for the next two hours.
Phase 3 : Growth stops for one hour as nutrients are used up and waste accumulates.
Phase 4 : All bacteria gra dually die off during the final four - hour phase.
*The strategies, tasks and items included in the B1G - M are examples and should not be considered comprehensive.
Geometric Reasoning
82 | Page

===== B1G-M-Grd8-TI · page 83 =====
MA. 8 . GR .1 Develop an understanding of the Pythagorean Theorem and angle relationships
involving triangles.
MA.8.GR.1.1
Benchmark
Apply the Pythagorean Theorem to solve mathematical and real - world
MA.8.GR.1.1
problems involving unknown side lengths in right triangles.
Benchmark Clarifications:
Clarification 1: Instruction includes exploring right triangles with natural - number side lengths to
illustrate the Pythagorean Theorem.
Clarification 2: Within this benchmark, the expectation is to memorize the Pythagorean Theorem.
Clarification 3: Radicands are limited to whole numbers up to 225.
Connecting Benchmarks/Horizontal Alignment Terms from the K - 12 Glossary
• MA.8.NSO.1. 2, MA.8.NSO.1.7 • C onverse of Pythagorean
• MA.8.AR.2.3 Theorem
• H ypotenuse
Vertical Alignment
Previous Benchmarks Next Benchmarks
• MA.6. GR.2.1 • MA.912.GR.1.3
• MA.912.GR.7.2
• MA.912.T.1.1 , MA.912.T.1.2
Purpose and Instructional Strategies
In grade 6, students worked with right triangles, with a focus on how the area of a right triangle
is determined by its side lengths . In grade 8, students use the Pythagorean Theorem to determine
side lengths of right triangles . In Geometry , students will use trigonometry to continue their work
with right triangles , and they extend the understanding of the Pythagorean Theorem to create the
equation of a circle.
• While it is not the expectation of this benchmark, instruction includes building
2 2 2
understanding of the Pythagorean Theorem ( 𝑎 + 𝑏 = 𝑐 ) by proving it in various ways .
Many of them connect the side lengths of right triangles to the areas of associated
squares.
o Instruction includes using exploration activities that allow students to see how to
use areas of squares to find missing sides. Students can use grid paper to dra w
right triangles from given measures and represent and comput e the areas of the
squares on each side. Below is an example of what students can visualize in order
to understand the conceptual understanding within the Pythagorean Theorem.
83 | Page

===== B1G-M-Grd8-TI · page 84 =====
o Data can be recorded in a chart such as the one below, allowing for students to
conjecture about the relationship among the areas of squares and side lengths of
right triangles .
Area of
Measure Measure of Area of Square Area of Square
Triangle S quare on
of Leg 1 Leg 2 on Leg 1 on Leg 2
Hypotenuse
1
2
• When introducing the Pythagorean Theorem, some students may not be able to visualize
the side lengths and the connection to the values of 𝑎 , 𝑏 and 𝑐 . Using colors to color code
the sides and hypotenuse will allow students to see the connection and ident ify with the
𝑎 , 𝑏 , and 𝑐 used to represent the sides.
• While solv ing real - world problems, students should be encouraged to draw diagrams
where they can see the right triangles being used. Students will need to understand the
ideas within the Triangle In equality Theorem to help differentiate between the legs and
the hypotenuse of a right triangle.
Common Misconceptions or Errors
• Students may make errors in calculations when using the Pythagorean Theorem and
finding square roots.
• Students may not be able to spatially visualize triangles within the real - world problems.
To address this misconception, instruction includes models for these problems with
triangles and drawings to help students orient the ideas within the tasks.
• Students may misidentify the side lengths and hypotenuse when connecting to the
2 2 2
formula of 𝑎 + 𝑏 = 𝑐 . To support students as they are developing the conceptual
2 2 2
understanding of thi s benchmark, using the idea of 𝑙𝑒𝑔 + 𝑙𝑒𝑔 = ℎ 𝑦𝑝𝑜𝑡𝑒𝑛𝑢𝑠𝑒 as a
transition to using the formula.
84 | Page

===== B1G-M-Grd8-TI · page 85 =====
Strategies to Support Tiered Instruction
• Instruction includes modeling the differences between doubling and squaring a radius.
Doubling a radius would be represented by multiplying the given length, whereas
squaring a number would be represented by the area of a square with the given radius.
o For example, students can be given the table below to show how the left column
doubles a length whereas the right column squares a length.
Given length of 5 Given length of 5
2
Representing 5 ⋅ 2 Representing 5
• Teacher creates and posts an anchor chart for calculating the Pythagorean Theorem with
visuals focused on solving for the variable and finding the square root.
• Instruction includes providing students with a right triangle as a visual in the context of a
real - world problem. Teacher provides instruction using the information from the real -
world problem to label the visual representation before solving.
• Instruction includes co - constructing a graphic organizer for the square root of perfect
squares from 0 to 225 to provide students with the opportunity to determine benchmark
numbers for non - perfect squares.
• Instruction includes color - coding and labeling a right triangle or a rectangular prism to
provide a visual representation of variables, side lengths and hypotenuse.
• Instruction includes co - constructing a model with students and completing a graphic
organizer to make the connection between the side lengths of right triangles to the area of
the associated square.
• Instruction includes including time for reviewing solving for variables and finding square
roots prior to instruction on this benchmark.
• Instruction includes models for problems with triangles and dra wings to help students
orient the ideas within the tasks.
2 2 2
• Instruction includes the use of the idea of 𝑙 𝑒𝑔 + 𝑙𝑒𝑔 = ℎ 𝑦𝑝𝑜𝑡𝑒𝑛𝑢𝑠𝑒 as a transition to
using the formula to assist in developing a conceptual understanding of the benchmark
for student s that misidentify the side lengths and hypotenuse when connecting the
2 2 2
formula of 𝑎 + 𝑏 = 𝑐 (laminating formulas on a printed card for students to utilize as
a resource in and out of the classroom would be helpful).
Instructional Tasks
85 | Page

===== B1G-M-Grd8-TI · page 86 =====
Instructional Task 1 (MTR.2.1, MTR.4.1, MTR.7.1)
The bases on a baseball diamond are 90 feet apart on a standard baseball field.
Part A . Draw a model of the baseball diamond.
Part B . What is the distance, in feet, for the catcher to throw from home plate to second
base?
Part C . What is the distance, in feet, from first base to third base?
Instructional Task 2 (MTR.1.1)
You are wrapping a gift for your teacher’s birthday. It is a very long and skinny pencil. You
want to wrap it in a box so that your teacher cannot tell what shape it is. Your friend has a
shoe box that measures 10 inches by 7 inches by 5 inches.
Part A . What questions would still need to be answered to approach this problem? Do
you need all of the measurements provided in the problem? Explain your answer.
Part B . If the pencil measures 13 inches long, will it fit in the shoe box with the lid
clo sed? Explain your answer.
Part C . What are the possible dimensions of a box that can just barely fit a pencil
measuring 9 inches long?
Instructional Items
Instructional Item 1
The bottom of a ladder must be placed 3 feet from a wall. The ladder is 10 feet long. How
far above the ground does the ladder touch the wall?
Instructional Item 2
Using the figure below, find the value of the length of side 𝐴𝐵 in meters.
Instructional Item 3
If a right triangle’s legs are both the same length, 𝑥 , and the hypotenuse of the triangle is 25
feet, what is the value of 𝑥 , in feet?
*The strategies, tasks and items included in the B1G - M are examples and should not be considered comprehensive.
MA.8. GR .1. 2
Benchmark
86 | Page

===== B1G-M-Grd8-TI · page 87 =====
Apply the Pythagorean Theorem to solve mathematical and real - world
MA.8.GR.1.2
problems involving the distance between two points in a coordinate plane.
Example: The distance between ( − 2 , 7 ) and ( 0 , 6 ) can be found by creating a right triangle with
the vertex of the right angle at the point ( − 2 , 6 ) . This gives a height of the right
triangle as 1 unit and a base of 2 units. Then using the Pythagorean Theorem the
2 2 2
distance can be determined from the equati on 1 + 2 = 𝑐 , which is equivalent to 5 =
2
𝑐 . So, the distance is √ 5 units.
Benchmark Clarifications:
Clarification 1: Instruction includes making connections between distance on the coordinate plane and
right triangles.
Clarification 2: Within this benchm ark, the expectation is to memorize the Pythagorean Theorem. It is
not the expectation to use the distance formula.
Clarification 3: Radicands are limited to whole numbers up to 225.
Connecting Benchmarks/Horizontal Alignment Terms from the K - 12 Glossary
• MA.8. NSO.1. 2, MA.8.NSO.1.7 • C oordinate
• MA.8.AR.2.3 • C oordinate P lane
Vertical Alignment
Previous Benchmarks Next Benchmarks
• MA.6.GR.1.2 , MA.6.GR.1.3 • MA.912.GR.3.2 , MA.912.GR.3.3 ,
MA.912.GR.3.4
• MA.912.GR.7.2
• MA.912.T.1.1 , MA.912.T.1.2
Purpose and Instructional Strategies
In grade 6, students used their understanding of the coordinate plane to plot rational - number
ordered pairs in all four quadrants and on both axes , a n d they found the distances between
ordered pairs with the same 𝑥 - coordinate or the same 𝑦 - coordinate represente d on the coordinate
plane. In grade 8, students find the distance between two points using the Pythagorean Theorem.
In Geometry , students will use coordinate geometry to classify or justify definitions, properties
and theorems involving circles , triangles or quadrilaterals. Additionally , students will extend this
understanding to using coordinate geometry and trigonometry to solve mathematical and real -
world problems involving lines, circles, triangles, quadrilaterals and finding the perimeter or area
of po lygons.
• Instruction includes creating a right triangle from two given points and then using the
Pythagorean Theorem to find the distance between the two given points. This work can
be started by using Geoboards to see the triangle that is formed within th e coordinate
plane. Students can show how to make a right triangle using vertical and horizontal lines.
From there they can build the area models of the Pythagorean Theorem to support
understanding.
87 | Page

===== B1G-M-Grd8-TI · page 88 =====
• Students should be given multiple opportunities to see the importance of using the
coordinate plane to find the distance between two points.
• Instruction includes providing students with a structure to support the organization of
their work since using the Pythagorean Theorem may require multiple steps. Provide
students with resources, including the coordinate plane and graph paper, as a way to plan
out their work.
Common Misconceptions or Errors
• Students may have the misconception that the Pythagorean Theorem will apply to any
triangle.
• Students may invert the 𝑥 - and 𝑦 - value of the point.
• When finding distances that cross over an axis students may incorrectly use operations
with integers.
o For example, if given the points ( − 2 , 0 ) and ( 3 , 0 ) , students may calculate the
distance as 1 unit instead of 5 units.
Strategies to Support Tiered Instruction
• Instruction includes the use of geometric software to explore the Pytha gorean Theorem
on obtuse, acute and right triangles .
• Instruction includes students adding the absolute value of two x - coordinates or two y -
coordinates when the given points cross over an axis.
o For example, if the given points are ( − 4 , 8 ) and ( 7 , 8 ) , students will add the
absolute value of − 4 and 7 .
| − 4 | + | 7 | = 11
• Teacher provides opportunities for students to comprehend the context or situation by
engaging in questions.
o What do you know from the problem?
o What is the problem asking you to find?
o Can you create a visual model to help you understand or see patterns in your
problem?
• Instruction includes labeling the 𝑥 - and 𝑦 - value of a coordinate point before graphing to
r einforce the process of graphing 𝑥 - and 𝑦 - values.
• Instruction includes laying trace paper on top of a coordinate plane, tracing the points,
drawing a number line through the two points, and counting the space between the points
to find the distance.
• Teacher creates an anchor chart while students create a similar own graphic organizer to
include key features of a coordinate plane. Features include the 𝑥 - axis, 𝑦 - axis, ori gin,
quadrants, numbered scales and an ordered pair.
• Instruction includ es the use of a three - read strategy. Students read the problem three
different times, each with a different purpose (laminating these questions on a printed
card for students to utilize as a resource in and out of the classroom would be helpful).
o First, re ad the problem with the purpose of answering the question: What is the
problem, context, or story about?
o Second, read the problem with the purpose of answering the question: What are
we trying to find out?
o Third, read the problem with the purpose of answering the question: What
information is important in the problem?
88 | Page

===== B1G-M-Grd8-TI · page 89 =====
Instructional Tasks
Instructional Task 1 ( MTR.2.1, MTR.7.1)
Pineridge Middle School was given a grant from Home Helper Depot to create a triangular
garden along a wall of the c afeteria for fresh vegetables. The length of the hypotenuse and
the sides are being determined to see if it will fit in the space. On the model for the garden,
the designer started by plotting the points ( 2 , 2 ) and ( 6 , 5 ) on a coordinate plane and
con nected the points with a line. She needs to complete the triangular model and determine
all three side lengths.
Part A . Using a coordinate grid, complete the designer's drawing.
Part B. Calculate the side lengths of the triangular garden on the model.
Part C. What would be appropriate lengths for a triangular garden if the length of one
si de of the building is 20 feet? Us e your model to help determine the side lengths.
Instructional Items
Instructional Item 1
On a coordinate plane, plot the points ( − 3 , 4 ) and ( 0 , − 3 ) . Using the Pythagorean Theorem,
determine the distance between the two points.
Instructional Item 2
Using the Pythagorean Theorem, determine the distance from point ( 8 , − 6 ) to the origin.
*The strategies, tasks and items included in the B1G - M are examples and should not be considered comprehensive.
MA.8. GR .1. 3
Benchmark
Use the Triangle Inequality Theorem to determine if a triangle can be formed
MA.8.GR.1.3 from a given set of sides. Use the converse of the Pythagorean Theorem to
determine if a right triangle can be formed from a given set of sides.
Connecting Benchmarks/Horizontal Alignment Terms from the K - 12 Glossary
• MA.8.NSO.1.7 • C onverse of the Pythagorean
• MA.8. AR.2.2 Theorem
Vertical Alignment
Previous Benchmarks Next Benchmarks
• MA.5.GR.1.1 • MA.912.GR.1.3
Purpose and Instructional Strategies
In grade 5, students classified triangles based on their angle measures and their side lengths. In
grade 8, students use the Triangle Inequality Theorem and Pythagorean Theorem to determine
whether triangles, or right triangles, can be formed from a given set of sides . In Geometry ,
students will extend this understanding to prove relationships and theorems about triangles.
• Instruction includes modeling and drawing triangles with different side lengths to
determine if they can make a triangle to help in con ceptual understanding. Students can
physically construct triangles with manipulatives such as straws, sticks, string or
geometry apps prior to using rulers ( MTR.2.1 ).
89 | Page

===== B1G-M-Grd8-TI · page 90 =====
• Exploration should involve giving students three side measures to determine if a triangl e
can be made. Through discussion of their exploration results, students should conclude
that triangles cannot be formed by any three arbitrary side measures.
o For example, if students are given 4, 5 and 10, they should conclude that it does
not form a tri angle.
o Through charting, students should realize that for a triangle to result, the sum of
any two side lengths must be greater than the third side length. This can be
charted in a table like the one below.
Length 1 Length 2 Length 3
Triangle? 𝑳𝟏 + 𝑳𝟐
(smallest) (middle) (largest)
• Once students understand the Triangle Inequality Theorem, they can apply their
knowledge to the converse of the Pythagorean Theorem. In work with the previous
benchmark, students verify using a model that the sum of the squares of the legs is equal
to the square of the hypotenuse in a right triangle. Students should also understand that if
the sum of the squares of the 2 smaller legs of a triangle is equal to the square of the third
leg, then the triangle is a right triangle.
Common Misconceptions or Errors
• Students may incorrectly think that the Triangle Inequality Theorem only applies to right
triangles due to the work with the Pythagorean Theorem. Discussion of the two theorems
and examples will help with this misconception.
• Students may incorrectly believe endpoints of the sides of the triangle do not have to
meet at a vertex.
o For example, students will attempt to make a tri angle such as the example below.
90 | Page

===== B1G-M-Grd8-TI · page 91 =====
Strategies to Support Tiered Instruction
• Instruction includes co - constructing a graphic organizer to highlight key differences and
use of the Pythagorean Theorem and the Triangle Inequality Theorem.
• Instruction includes the use of geometric software to allow for students to explore the
similariti es and differences between the Pythagorean Theorem and the Triangle
Inequality Theorem.
• Teacher provides instruction on the definition of a triangle and allows for students to
explore various side lengths using geometric software or manipulatives to determine if
the lengths form a triangle.
Instructional Tasks
Instructional Task 1 ( MTR.6.1, MTR.7.1)
The following side lengths, in meters, were given to a carpenter to build a front porch with a
triangular design. The carpenter needs to determine which set of lengths will make a triangle
to be able to use it in his design.
Option 1: Side lengths: 4, 4, 8
Option 2: Side lengths: 6, 8, 10
Option 3: Side lengths: 6, 6, 13
Part A. Which of the options would create a triangle for his design?
Part B. The homeowner would like the porch to be in the shape of a right triangle. Will
the carpenter be able to use a ny of the given options?
Part C. For any option that does not form a triangle, what side length could be changed to
form a triangle? Explain your answer.
Instructional Items
Instructional Item 1
Can the side lengths of a triangle be 2, 4 and 8? Justify your answer.
Instructional Item 1
John drew a triangle with side lengths of 5, 12 and 13. His friend, Bryan, looked at it and
asked J ohn if it is a right triangle. John’s response was yes. Explain or show how John can
prove to Bryan that the triangle is a right triangle.
*The strategies, tasks and items included in the B1G - M are examples and should not be considered comprehensive.
91 | Page

===== B1G-M-Grd8-TI · page 92 =====
MA.8. GR .1. 4
Benchmark
Solve mathematical problems involving the relationships between
MA.8.GR.1.4
supplementary, complementary, vertical or adjacent angles.
Connecting Benchmarks/Horizontal Alignment Terms from the K - 12 Glossary
( )
• MA.8.AR.2.1 • A ngle ∠
• C omplementary ( ∠ )
• S upplementary ( ∠ )
• V ertical
Vertical Alignment
Previous Benchmarks Next Benchmarks
• MA.4.GR.1 • MA.912.GR.1.1
• MA.5.GR.1.1
Purpose and Instructional Strategies
In the elementary grades , students were introduced to acute, right, obtuse, straight reflex angles
and solved real - world and mathematical problems involving angle measures . They also used
angles to classify triangles and quadrilaterals . In grade 8, students solve problems involving
supplementary, complementar y, vertical and adjacent angles. In Geometry , students will extend
the learning from this benchmark to prove relationships and theorems involving lines and angles.
• This benchmark is foundational to help develop the understanding of angles and
connections related to parallel lines cut by a transversal.
• In order for students to learn relationships between angles, it is important to provide an
opportunity to connect complementary and supplementary angles to work with triangles.
Students should dr aw or be given a right triangle to explore rearranging the angles to
show both the 90 and 180 degrees that can be created for a right angle and a straight line,
respectively.
• To support the concept of adjacent angles, students should have examples and non -
examples to write their own definition and revise it based on critiques from others
( MTR.4.1 ). Students should trace each angle with different colors to ensure that there
isn’t overlap, but has a common side.
Criteria Example Non - Example
pair of
angles
common
vertex
common
side
92 | Page

===== B1G-M-Grd8-TI · page 93 =====
do not
overlap
• When discussing vertical angles, use a model of two strips of paper with a small brad at
the center where they cross. Then, moving the paper to create different sized angles,
measure each angle to show the vertical angle measures to lead to understanding t hat the
vertical angles will have the same measure.
• Vertical angles can be explored using the same activity as adjacent angles with examples
and non - examples. The criteria could include the following:
o Formed from exactly 2 straight intersecting lines
o Pa ir of angles
o Non - adjacent
o Common vertex
• It is important to have students’ reasoning supported. This can be done by making
statements with reasoning such as “always true, sometimes true, never true.”
o For example, a linear pair of angles (a type of adjacent angles) are always
supplementary because they form a straight line.
• Once conceptual understanding and definitions are built, introduce algebraic concepts for
students to write and solve equations using facts about the angle relationships. Students
should be able to generate equations written in different forms.
o For example, if students are provided the figure below, they can generate multiple
equivalent equations to represent their thinking. For this figure, three possible
equations are:
180 = 147 + 2 𝑥 + 3
180 − 147 = 2 𝑥 + 3
2 𝑥 + 150 = 180
Common Misconceptions or Errors
• Students may invert the definition of complementary and supplementary.
Strategies to Support Tiered Instruction
• Instruction includes co - constructing a graphic organizer with students to measure, label
and record the angle measurement of two intersecting lines. The teacher labels the angles,
and measures and record the angle measurements. The teacher then leads a discussion
and documents the relationships between different angl e pairs.
• Instruction includes erasing or covering part of a line for students to visually see the
supplementary angles within two intersecting lines.
93 | Page

===== B1G-M-Grd8-TI · page 94 =====
• Instruction includes co - creating a graphic organizer identifying the relationships between
supplementary , complementary, vertical, and adjacent angles. Include a strategy for
solving problems involving each type of angle pair, such as setting vertical angle
measures equal.
Instructional Tasks
Instructional Task 1 (MTR.1.1, MTR.2.1)
Complete the table below that includes the following types of angles:
Angle Pairs Draw an Example (include Estimate the
points to identify the angles) angle measures
Complementary
Supplementary
Adjacent
Vertical
Instructional Task 2 (MTR.4.1)
Determine if each of the following statements is always true, sometimes true or never true.
For each statement that you chose as “sometimes true”, provide an example and non -
example.
a. The sum of the measures of two supplementary angles is 180° .
b. Vertical angles are also adjacent angles.
c. Two adjacent angles are complementary.
d. If two lines intersect, each pair of vertical angles are complementary.
Instructional Items
Instructional Item 1
The measure of angle 1 is 12 more than the measure of angle 2. What is the degree measure
of angle 3?
*The strategies, tasks and items included in the B1G - M are examples and should not be considered comprehensive.
MA.8. GR.1.5
Benchmark
94 | Page

===== B1G-M-Grd8-TI · page 95 =====
Solve problems involving the relationships of interior and exterior angles of a
MA.8.GR.1.5
triangle.
Benchmark Clarifications:
Clarification 1: Problems include using the Triangle Sum Theorem and representing angle measures as
algebraic expressions.
Connecting Benchmarks/Horizontal Alignment Terms from the K - 12 Glossary
• MA.8.AR.2.1 • A ngle ( ∠ )
• S upplementary A ngles
Vertical Alignment
Previous Benchmarks Next Benchmarks
• MA.4.GR.1.2 , MA.4.GR.1.3 • MA.912.GR.1.3
• MA.5.GR.1.1
Purpose and Instructional Strategies
In grade s 4 and 5 , students used angle measure s as an attribute of two - dimensional figures and
identified and classified angles as acute, right , obtuse, straight and reflex. In grade 8, students
solve problems involving the interior and exterior angles of a triangle. In Geometry , the work in
this bench mark will be extended to proving relationships and theorems about triangles.
• Students should explore the concept befo re being provided the theorem. Once conceptual
understanding is developed, students can use numerical equations to solve problems
involvin g finding missin g interior or exterior angles. From there, students should develop
algebraic equations to solve for both missing angle measurements as well as variables.
• Instruction includes students exploring and using deductive reasoning to determine
rel ationships that exist between angle sums and exterior angle sums of triangles. Students
should construct various triangles and find the measures of both the interior and exterior
angles. Applying knowledge of these relationships, students can use deductive reasoning
to find the measure of any missing angles.
• Using an investigation, such as the one below, for the Triangle Sum Theorem will help
students conceptually understand the total degree measures of a triangle related to a
straight line.
o Give each st udent a triangle (a variety of triangle sizes will allow for discussion).
o Have students use a lined sheet of paper or draw a straight line using a ruler to
represent the straight angle of 180° .
o Next, have the students tear off each angle of the triangle.
o Then, putting the angle side towards the line, the students will be able to model
the 180° of the triangle measures to a straight line. This is illustrated in the top
part of the figure below.
o A similar investigation can be used to connect the measure of an exterior angle of
a triangle and the two opposite interior angles in the triangle .
• Students can also use patty paper to trace the concepts to make connections.
Common Misconceptions or Errors
95 | Page

===== B1G-M-Grd8-TI · page 96 =====
• Students may incorrectly think that the exterior angle is the whole reflex angle of the
interior angle.
• Students may not recognize that there are two exterior angles for each interior angle and
that the exterior angles are congruent.
Strategies to Support Tiered Instruction
• Teacher provides a visual with one angle of the triangle on a straight line of 180°, similar
to the illustration below. Teacher provides instruction on how to measure each of the
angles with a protractor and color code congruent angles.
• Teacher provides tracing paper or patty paper to trace the related interior and exterior
angle s and have discussion about the angle relationships.
• Instruction includes providing a visual with one angle of the triangle on a straight line of
180° and measuring each angle in the figure. Teacher co - constructs a graphic organizer
with students to document the angle measurements, color - code congruent angles in the
figure and in the graphic organizer, and identifies the relationshi ps between interior and
exterior angles of a triangle and the Triangle Sum Theorem.
Interior Angles Exterior Angles Relationship
Instructional Tasks
Instructional Task 1 (MTR.1.1, MTR.2.1)
𝛥𝐴𝐵𝐶 and 𝛥𝐵𝐶𝐷 share a common side of 𝐵𝐶 . Angle 𝐵𝐴𝐶 is 30° and angle 𝐴𝐵𝐶 is 60° .
Part A . Create a diagram to represent this description .
Part B . What will be the measure of angle 𝐵𝐶𝐷 ? Provide an explanation to support how
to find the measurement of angle 𝐵𝐶𝐷 .
Part C. Are there questions that still need to be answered to approach Part B ?
Instructional Items
Instructional Item 1
In triangle 𝐿𝑀𝑁 , the measure of angle 𝐿 is 50° and the measure of angle 𝑀 70° . What is the
measure of the exterior angle to angle 𝑁 ?
Instructional Item 2
One measure of an angle in a triangle is 96°. The other two angle measures are represented
by 2 𝑥 and 𝑥 + 12 . Determine the other two degree measures for the missing angles.
*The strategies, tasks and items included in the B1G - M are examples and should not be considered comprehensive.
96 | Page

===== B1G-M-Grd8-TI · page 97 =====
MA.8. GR.1.6
Benchmark
Develop and use formulas for the sums of the interior angles of regular
MA.8.GR.1.6
polygons by decomposing them into triangles.
Benchmark Clarifications:
Clarification 1: Problems include representing angle measures as algebraic expressions.
Connecting Benchmarks/Horizontal Alignment Terms from the K - 12 Glossary
• MA.8.AR.2.1 • R egular P olygon
Vertical Alignment
Previous Benchmarks Next Benchmarks
• MA.6.GR.2.2 • MA.912.GR.1.3 , MA.912.GR.1.4 ,
MA.912.GR.1.5
• MA.7.GR.1.2
Purpose and Instructional Strategies
In grade s 6 and 7 , students found areas of quadrilaterals and other polygons by decomposing
them into triangles and trapezoids. In grade 8, students develop and use formulas for the sums of
the interior angles of regular polygons by decomposing them into triangles . In Geometry ,
students will use this knowledge to prove relationships and theorems about triangles,
parallelograms , trapezoids and other polygons .
• Once students understand the conceptu al understanding associated with this benchmark,
students should progress from numerical expressions to algebraic expressions.
• When beginning the exploration with polygons with four or more sides, students should
be able to use one vertex to draw diagonal s to non - adjacent vertices. Once students have
drawn the diagonals, have them cut along the diagonals to showcase triangles.
• Once the triangles are cut, then students can lay them out to see the number of triangles
and relate the work to prior work with the sum of the angles of a triangle. Students can
label their angles and show their equations that help provide information on the sum of
the interior angles as shown below.
97 | Page

===== B1G-M-Grd8-TI · page 98 =====
• Students should record this information in a chart like the one shown below to help them
create a rule to use instead of counting the triangles each time.
Shape Sides # of Triangles Sum of Interior Angles
triangle 3 1 180°
quadrilateral 4 2 360°
pentagon 5 3 540°
… … … …
any polygon 𝑛 𝑛 − 2 ( 𝑛 − 2 ) × 180°
• Once students understand the sum of the interior angles, connections should be made to
regular polygons. Students can add a column to indicate the regular polygon
measurements of each angle.
• Encourage students to use proper vocabulary terms for polygons and regular polygons.
Common Misconceptions or Errors
• Students may incorrectly draw additional lines from the vertex to create additional
triangles.
Strategies to Support Tiered Instruction
• Teacher encourages students to begin at an identified vertex and move around the
polygon from that vertex when decomposing the polygons into triangles.
Instructional Tasks
Instructional Task 1 (MTR.5.1)
Use your knowledge about shapes to complete the following task.
Part A . Draw a pentagon, hexagon, heptagon and an octagon.
Part B. Determine the number of triangles that can be drawn from one vertex to each of
the others in each figure.
Part C . Develop a conjecture to determine if there is a pattern or formula that can be
determined to find the sums of the interior angles for any polygon.
Instructional Items
Instructional Item 1
Find the number of degrees for the sum of the interior angles of a regular 12 - sided figure.
*The strategies, tasks and items included in the B1G - M are examples and should not be considered comprehensive.
MA. 8 . GR . 2 Understand similarity and congruence using models and transformations.
MA.8. GR.2.1
Benchmark
Given a preimage and image generated by a single transformation, identify the
MA.8.GR.2.1
transformation that describes the relationship.
Benchmark Clarifications:
Clarification 1: Within this benchmark, transformations are limited to reflections, translations or rotations
of images.
98 | Page

===== B1G-M-Grd8-TI · page 99 =====
Clarification 2: Instruction focuses on the preservation of congruence so that a figure maps onto a copy of
itself.
Connecting Benchmarks/Horizontal Alignment Terms from the K - 12 Glossary
• Congruent
• Reflection
• Rigid Transformation
• Rotation
• Translation
Vertical Alignment
Previous Benchmarks Next Benchmarks
• MA.6.GR.1.1 • MA.912.F.2
• MA.7.GR.1.5 • MA.912.GR.2
Purpose and Instructional Strategies
In grade 6, students identified the 𝑥 - or 𝑦 - axis as lines of reflection , and in grade 7, students
solve d problems involving scale drawings of geometric figures . In grade 8, students are
introduced to the geometric transformations of reflection, dilation (scaling) and translation . In
Algebra 1, students will describe transformations applied to functions . In Geometry , students
will describe transformations given a preimage and an image and represent the transformation
algebraically using coordinates. They will use transformations to justify congruence and
similarity.
• Informal language such as turns, flips , and slides can be use d when exploring the
concepts. As students transition, they should use formal mathematical language of
rotations, reflections and translations. Students should have materials such as shapes cut
from paper to model the transformations .
• Instruction includes the use of real - world examples that don’t have to be a geometric
figure.
o For example, wallpaper, art, architecture and mirrors have images generated by
si mple transformations.
• The work of transformations builds from students being able to visually see the images
and developing a spatial understanding as the images move about the coordinate plane.
• Transformations can be noted using the prime notation ( ′ ) for the image and its ve rtices .
T he preimage and its vertices will not have prime notation.
o For example, the picture below showcases a single transformation.
• Problem type include stating which direction, clockwise or counterclockwise, for
rotations.
• The expectation of this benchmark is not to represent a transformation on the coordinate
plane as this will be included in MA.8.GR.2.3 instruction. During instruction, there
should be flexibi lity moving from this benchmark to MA.8.GR.2.3 with each
99 | Page

===== B1G-M-Grd8-TI · page 100 =====
transformation which allows students to build conceptually prior to algorithmically.
• For mastery of this benchmark, single transformations include one vertical translation or
one horizontal translati on. A vertical and horizontal translation would be considered two
transformations.
Common Misconceptions or Errors
• Students may incorrectly visualize the movement of a figure. To support instruction,
students may need manipulatives such as tangrams and tessellations to help with
physically moving the figures to understand the transformations.
Strategies to Support Tiered Instruction
• Teacher supports instruction by using manipulatives such as tangrams and tessellations to
help with physically moving the figures to understand the transformations.
• Teacher models using geometric software and creates a graphic organizer to understand
each transformation with relatable vocabulary.
• Teacher uses example images and preimages to demonstrate the different types of
transformation and how to identify images and preimages.
• Teacher encourages the use of manipulatives and models counting the units moved to
verify the proper movement of the transformation.
• Instruction includes the use of tracing pa per to trace the pre - image and explore possible
transformations by slides, rotating, and flipping the image to try to reproduce the image.
Instructional Tasks
Instructional Task 1 (MTR.6.1)
Is it possible to have 𝛥𝑃𝑅𝑄 make one translation, rotation , or reflection to become the image
of 𝛥𝐴𝐵𝐶 ? Explain why or why it is not possible. Determine which transformation(s) may be
used.
Instructional Items
Instructional Item 1
Determine the transformation from the preimage above line m to the image below line 𝑚 .
100 | Page

===== B1G-M-Grd8-TI · page 101 =====
Instructional Item 2
Draw a right triangle labeled with vertices 𝑀𝑁𝑂 and then sketch the right triangle that has
been rotated 90° counterclockwise.
*The strategies, tasks and items included in the B1G - M are examples and should not be considered comprehensive.
101 | Page

===== B1G-M-Grd8-TI · page 102 =====
MA.8. GR.2.2
Benchmark
Given a preimage and image generated by a single dilation, identify the scale
MA.8.GR.2.2
factor that describes the relationship.
Benchmark Clarifications:
Clarification 1: Instruction includes the connection to scale drawings and proportions.
Clarification 2: Instruction focuses on the preservation of similarity and the lack of preservation of
congruence when a figure maps onto a scaled copy of itself, unless the scaling fa ctor is 1.
Connecting Benchmarks/Horizontal Alignment Terms from the K - 12 Glossary
• D ilation
• S cale F actor
Vertical Alignment
Previous Benchmarks Next Benchmarks
• MA.7.GR.1.5 • MA.912.F.2
• MA.912.GR.2
Purpose and Instructional Strategies
In grade 7, students solved mathematical and real - world problems involving scale factors. In
grade 8, students determine the scale factor that describes the relationship after a single dilation.
In Geometry , students will use dilations to study similarity.
• Instruction includes the use of real - world examples that do not have to be a geometric
figure.
o For example, projections, photocopies and maps have images generated by a
single dilation.
• Students will need to understand scale factor to help in the idea of an image enlarging or
reducing. A scale factor between 0 and 1 will be a reduction in the image. A scale factor
that is greater than one will result in an enlargement of the image.
• Transformations can be noted using the prime notation ( ′ ) for the image and its vertices .
T he preimage and its vertices will not have prime notation.
o For example, the picture below showcases a single dilation.
• The expectation of this benchmark is not to represent a dilation on the coordinate plane as
this will be included in MA.8.GR.2.3 instruction.
Common Misconceptions or Errors
102 | Page

===== B1G-M-Grd8-TI · page 103 =====
• Students may incorrectly visualize the images with scale factors. To address this
misconception, include practice in visualizing the reduction and enlargement based on the
scale factors.
Strategies to Support Tiered Instruction
• Instruction includes practice in visualizing the reduction and enlargement based on the
scale factors for students that incorrectly visualize images with scale factors.
o For example, two figures that have the same shape are said to be similar. When
two fi gures are similar, the ratios of the lengths of their corresponding sides are
equal and corresponding angles are congruent. Similar figures have the same
shape, but not necessarily the same size.
• Teachers can help students understand that t wo figures that have the same shape are said
to be similar. When two figures are similar, the ratios of the lengths of their
corresponding sides are equal. In example 1, the corresponding sides are 8:4, 2:1, 10:5,
and 12:6. These ratios are equal to 2, mea ning the shapes must be similar. The figures do
not have to be the same size in order to be similar.
• Instruction include practice in visualizing the reduction and enlargement based on the
scale factors.
Instructional Tasks
Instructional Task 1 (MTR. 7.1)
The height of a document on your computer is 20 centimeters. When you change the setting
to zoom in or out, yo u changed it from 100% to 25%. The new image of your document is a
dilation of your original document, the preimage. Determine the scale factor and the height of
the new image.
Instructional Items
Instructional Item 1
Does the image show reduction or enlargement from the quadrilateral 𝐽𝐾𝐿𝑀 ? What is the
scale factor?
*The strategies, tasks and items included in the B1G - M are examples and should not be considered comprehensive.
MA.8. GR.2.3
Benchmark
103 | Page

===== B1G-M-Grd8-TI · page 104 =====
Describe and apply the effect of a single transformation on two - dimensional
MA.8.GR.2.3
figures using coordinates and the coordinate plane.
Benchmark Clarifications:
Clarification 1: Within this benchmark, transformations are limited to reflections, translations, rotations
or dilations of images.
Clarification 2: Lines of reflection are limited to the 𝑥 - axis, 𝑦 - axis or lines parallel to the axes.
Clarification 3: Rotations must be about the origin and are limited to 90°, 180°, 270° or 360°.
Clarification 4 : Dilations must be centered at the origin.
Connecting Benchmarks/Horizontal Alignment Terms from the K - 12 Glossary
• C oordinates
• C oordinate P lane
Vertical Alignment
Previous Benchmarks Next Benchmarks
• MA.6.GR.1.1 • MA.912.F.2
• MA.7.GR.1.5 • MA.912.GR.2.4
Purpose and Instructional Strategies
In grade 6, students plotted rational - number ordered pairs in all four quadrants as well as
identified the 𝑥 - or 𝑦 - axis as a line of reflection when two ordered pairs have an opposite 𝑥 - or
𝑦 - coordinate. In grade 7, students solved mathematical and real - world problems involving scale
factors. In grade 8, students apply a single transformation using coordinates and the coordinate
plane. In Algebra 1, students will apply a single transformation to functions. In Geometry ,
students will describe transformations given a preimage and an image and represent the
transformation algebraically using coordinates and use them to study congruence and similarity.
• Use grid paper to illustrate translations of a line or triangle to demonstrate the
relationship between them and a new image. Then, illustrate translations of more
complex figures such as polygons.
• Transformations can be noted using the prime notation ( ′ ) for the image and its vertices .
T he preimage and its vertices will not have prime notation.
o For example, the picture below showcases a single transformation.
• Problem types include telling which direction, clockwise or counterclockwise, for
rotations.
• Instruction includes looking for patterns to create rules for transformations on the
coordinate plane.
• For mastery of this benchmark, single transformations include one vertical translation or
one horizontal translation. A vertical and horizontal translation would be considered two
transformations.
104 | Page

===== B1G-M-Grd8-TI · page 105 =====
Common Misconceptions or Errors
• Students may incorrectly visualize transformation on the coordinate plane. To address
this misconception, provide students with manipulatives.
• Students may incorrectly apply rules for transformations. To address this misconception,
students should generate examples and non - examples of given transformations.
Strategies to Support Tiered Instruction
• Teacher supports understanding of transformations on the coordinate place by providing
examples using geometric software. Instruction includes the use of manipulatives and
graph paper.
• Teacher reminds students w hen plotting points on a coordinate plane that they can first
find the 𝑥 - coordinate on the 𝑥 - axis (horizontal axis) and then find the 𝑦 - coordinate on the
𝑦 - axis (vertical axis).
• Teacher reviews vocabulary discussing the meaning of the terms.
o Translation is a vertical or horizontal slide of the figure . To determine the
coordinates of the image of a translated figure you must add or subtract the
horizontal distance to the 𝑥 - coordinate of each vertex and add or subtract the
vertical distance to the 𝑦 - coordinate of each vertex. (Note that in later courses,
students learn that translation can also occur diagonally . )
o P reimage is the figure before any transformations are perform ed.
o I mage is the figure after a transformation is performed.
• Teacher co - creates a graphic organizer to generate examples and non - examples of
reflections, translations, rotations, or dilations of images.
• Teacher provides instruction to support understanding of applying the translation to all
vertices, not just one vertex.
• Teacher reviews directions of rotations. Clockwise is the direction the hands go on an
analog clock . Counterclockwise is the opposite direction of the hands on an analog
clock .
o For example, w hich quadrant would the image be in if you rotated the figure?
▪ 90 degrees clockwise
▪ 90 degrees counterclockwise
▪ 180 degrees clockwise
▪ 180 degrees counterclockwis e
• Teacher reviews which is the 𝑥 - axis and which is the 𝑦 - axis for students that incorrectly
reflect across the wrong axis. Teacher co - creates anchor chart explaining different parts
of coordinate plane, and how to plot and label points.
o For example, teachers could ask students which quadrant the image would be in if
you reflected the figure across the 𝑥 - axis or across the 𝑦 - axis.
• Instruction includes providing students with manipulatives for students that incorrectly
visualize transfor mations on the coordinate plane.
105 | Page

===== B1G-M-Grd8-TI · page 106 =====
Instructional Tasks
Instructional Task 1 (MTR.1.1, MTR.2.1)
Use the information you have learned about transformations to complete the task below.
Part A . Using graph paper, plot the following points to create an image on the coordinate
plane.
𝐴 ( − 3 , 2 ) , 𝐵 ( 0 , 1 ) , 𝐶 ( − 3 , − 1 ) and 𝐷 ( − 1 , − 1 )
Part B . Using a different color for each transformation, complete each of the following
transformations on the same coordinate plane.
a. A refl ection over the 𝑦 - axis
b. A rotation of 180° about the origin
Part C . Will any of the new images include the origin?
Instructional Items
Instructional Item 1
Find the coordinates of the vertices of the image of triangle 𝐼𝐽𝐾 after the translation 3 units to
the left.
Instructional Item 2
Find the coordinates of the vertices of the image of triangle 𝐶𝐴𝑇 after a 270°
counterclockwise rotation about the origin.
*The strategies, tasks and items included in the B1G - M are examples and should not be considered comprehensive.
M A.8.GR.2.4
Benchmark
Solve mathematical and real - world problems involving proportional
MA.8.GR.2.4
relationships between similar triangles.
106 | Page

===== B1G-M-Grd8-TI · page 107 =====
Example: During a Tampa Bay Lightning game one player, Johnson, passes the puck to his
teammate, Stamkos , by bouncing the puck off the wall of the rink. The path of the puck
creates two line segments that form hypotenuses for each of two similar right triangles,
with the height of each triangle the distance from one of the players to the wall of the
rink. If Johnson is 12 feet from the wall and Stamkos is 3 feet from the wall. How far
did the puck travel from the wall of the rink to Stamkos if the distance traveled from
Johnson to the wall was 16 feet?
Connecting Benchmarks/Horizontal Alignment Terms from the K - 12 Glossary
• MA.8.AR.3. 1, MA.8.AR.3.2 • Proportional Relationships
• MA.8.GR. 1 .4 , MA.8.GR.1.5, • Similarity
MA.8.GR.1.6
Vertical Alignment
Previous Benchmarks Next Benchmarks
• MA.7.GR.1.5 • MA.912.GR.1.2 , MA.912.GR.1.3 ,
MA.912.GR.1.6
Purpose and Instructional Strategies
In grade 7, students solved mathematical and real - world problems involving scale factors. In
grade 8, students make connections of slope to the constant of proportionality through the use of
similar triangle when represented in the coordinate plan e (as stated in Clari fication 2 in
MA.8.AR.3.2). Additionally, students solve problems involving similar triangles. In high school,
students will prove triangle congruence or similarity using Side - Side - Side, Side - Angle - Side,
Angle - Side - Angle, Angle - Angle - Side, Angle - Angle and Hypotenuse - Leg.
• Instruction includes the definition of similarity applied to similar triangles, noting that the
similar triangles will have the same shape but not necessarily the same size. This will
extend to the angles being congruent and the sides being proportional.
• Students should be given real - world problem - solving opportunities in and out of the
classroom to be able to visual ize the work with similar triangles.
o For example, students should draw a picture to represent an application problem.
If students were given the problem: If a tree casts a 24 - foot shadow at the same
time that a yardstick casts a 2 - foot shadow , find the he ight of the tree. Students
can draw triangles to represent the situation.
Common Misconceptions or Errors
• Students may incorrectly assume the sides and angles of similar triangles must be
equivalent. To address this misconception, show a variety of examples of sizes of
triangles that are similar.
• When checking to see if the triangles are proportional, students may incorrectly make
connections to corresponding sides.
o For example, when triangles have been turned to a different orientation, students
may incorrectly match the sides to check for proportionality.
107 | Page

===== B1G-M-Grd8-TI · page 108 =====
Strategies to Support Tiered Instruction
• Instruction includes co - creating foldables or graphic organizers with “Definition in
Student’s Words, Examples, Non - Examples, and Real - World Application.” Present
students with examples of triangles that are similar and of different sizes.
• Teacher provid es objects that have the same shape and students label the corresponding
sides.
• Teacher models use of geometric software to practice similarity and congruence.
• Instruction includes showing a variety of examples of sizes of triangles that are similar
for s tudents that incorrectly assume the sides and angles of a similar triangles must be
equivalent.
Instructional Tasks
Instructional Task 1(MTR.6.1, MTR.7.1)
Given the description of two similar triangles below, sketch each triangle described in the
table.
Triangle 1 Triangle 2
The height of the triangle is The height of the triangle is
the height of a man who is 6 unknown since it represent s
feet tall. The base of the the height o f a cell phone
triangle makes a 90 - degree tower. The base of the triangle
angle with the height and is 4 makes a 90 - degree angle with
feet long. the height and is 20 feet long.
Part A . What would be a reasonable height of a cell phone tower?
Part B. Find the height of the cell phone tower. Is this a realistic height for the cell phone
tower?
Part C. Research heights of cell phone towers in your area. How does this answer
compare to cell phone towers in your area?
Part D. Using a typical height of cell phone towers in your area, what could you use in
the real - world to create similar triangles to be able to calculate the height of your
local cell phone tower?
Instructional Items
Instructional Item 1
Given the two triangles, are they similar?
Instructional Item 2
What is the height, ℎ , in meters?
108 | Page

===== B1G-M-Grd8-TI · page 109 =====
*The strategies, tasks and items included in the B1G - M are examples and should not be considered comprehensive.
109 | Page

===== B1G-M-Grd8-TI · page 110 =====
Data Analysis & Probability
MA. 8 . DP .1 Represent and investigate numerical bivariate data.
MA.8. DP .1.1
Benchmark
Given a set of real - world bivariate numerical data, construct a scatter plot or a
MA.8.DP.1.1
line graph as appropriate for the context.
Example: Jaylyn is collecting data about the relationship between grades in English and grades in
mathematics. He represents the data using a scatter plot because he is interested if there
is an association between the two variables without thinking of either one as an
independent or dependent variable.
Example: Samantha is collecting data on her weekly quiz grade in her social studies class. She
represents the data using a line graph with ti me as the independent variable.
Benchmark Clarifications:
Clarification 1: Instruction includes recognizing similarities and differences between scatter plots and
line graphs, and on determining which is more appropriate as a representation of the data based on the
context.
Clarification 2: Sets o f data are limited to 20 points.
Connecting Benchmarks/Horizontal Alignment Terms from the K - 12 Glossary
• MA. 8.AR.3 • B ivariate D ata
• S catter P lot
Vertical Alignment
Previous Benchmarks Next Benchmarks
• MA. 6.DP.1 • MA.912.DP. 2.4, MA.912.DP.2.6
• MA.7.DP.1 • MA. 912.DP.3.1
Purpose and Instructional Strategies
In grades 6 and 7, students worked with both numerical and categorical univariate data.
Additionally, students have had experience developing statistical questions since grade 6. In
grade 8, students encounter bivariate data , and it is restricted to numerical data , which is often
displayed with a scatter plot, but in some circumstances, may also be displayed with a line graph.
In Algebra 1 , students will continue working with scatter plots and line graphs for bivariate
numerical data, but expand their knowledge to bivariate categorical data, displayed with
frequency tables.
• Bivariate data refers to the two - variable data, with one variable graphed on the 𝑥 - axis and
the other variable on the 𝑦 - axis. Instruction includes flexibility in the understanding of
the dependent and independent variables. Students can represent situations in terms of 𝑥
or in terms of 𝑦 .
• Instruction includes proper labeling of gr aphical representations, including axes, scales
and a title.
• Line graphs are a way to map indepe ndent and dependent variables. Line graphs
showcase data by connec ting each data point together. The rate of change from a single
data point to anoth er data poi nt can be measured. An overall trend can be described, but
the trend is between individ ual or small groups of points. A line graph allows for the
110 | Page

===== B1G-M-Grd8-TI · page 111 =====
interpretation of the rate of change, or slope, between individual data points. The
independent variable can b e either numerical or categorical.
o For example, independent variables can be shown as months of the year.
• Scatter plots are another way to show the relationship between two variables having
individual points that will not b e connected directly together. Often neither variable is
thought of as the independent or dependent variable, so it is a matter of choice of which
variable will be represented on the 𝑥 - axis and which will be represented on the 𝑦 - axis.
Trends can be seen through the distribution of points. Scatter plots are used to collect a
large number of data points to illustrate patterns in the data including linear or non - linear
trends, clusters and outliers.
• Instruction includes the understanding that with bivariate data, a si ngle 𝑥 - value can be
associated with more than one 𝑦 - value. When this is the case, a scatter plot should be
used as the graphical display rather than a line graph.
• Instruction includes providing opportunities for students to interact with scatter plots
t hrough the development of statistical questions.
• Students should label and determine appropriate scales when completing work with
bivariate numerical data.
Common Misconceptions or Errors
• When discussing and interpreting the data, students may incorrectly identify an
association when the scatter plot shows no association. To address this misconception,
provide examples for students that would help them understand that some data will not
hav e association.
o For example, the height of a person and their number of pets.
• Students may confuse the dependent and independent variables when creating line
graphs .
• Students may incorrectly believe bivariate data can only be displayed as a scatter plot.
111 | Page

===== B1G-M-Grd8-TI · page 112 =====
Strategies to Support Tiered Instruction
• Teacher provides instruction on different types of associations, then provides clear
examples of associations of scatter plots for students who need additional assistance
identifying associations.
Positive Association Negative Association No Association
• Teacher provides instruction on independent and dependent variables and the difference
between them. Instruction includes the use of real - world situations to accurately identify
independent and dependent variables.
• Teacher co - creates anchor chart/graphic o rganizer showing different ways to display
data.
• Teacher provides examples for students to help them understand that some data will not
have association.
o For example, the height of a person and their number of pets.
Instructional Tasks
Instructional Task 1 (MTR.2.1, MTR.4.1, MTR.6.1)
Scientists at the new company, BunG, tested their bungee cords , used for bungee jumping,
with weights from 10 to 200 pounds. They identified a random sample of cords and
measured the length that each cord stretched when different weights were applied. The table
displays the average stretch length for the sample of cords for each weight.
Weight (in pounds) 10 30 50 70 100 125 150 175 200
Length (in feet) 11.5 16.4 20.7 25.1 29.6 35.2 38.8 42.3 44.7
Part A. Construct a scatter plot and a line graph for this set of data.
Part B. Which representation is most appropriate for displaying and describing the
relationship between the weights applied to a bungee cord and the length the
cord stretches? Explain your reasoning.
Instructional Items
Instructional Item 1
A pool cleaning service drained a full pool. The following table shows the number of hours
it drained and the amount of water remaining in the pool at that time.
Time (hours) 3 5 7 9 11
Water Remaining (gallons) 13,200 12,050 10,900 9,800 8,7 50
Construct a line graph or scatter plot for the data above based on which is most appropriate
for the context.
*The strategies, tasks and items included in the B1G - M are examples and should not be considered comprehensive.
MA.8. DP.1.2
Benchmark
112 | Page

===== B1G-M-Grd8-TI · page 113 =====
Given a scatter plot within a real - world context, de scribe patterns of
MA.8.DP.1.2
association.
Benchmark Clarifications:
Clarification 1: Descriptions include outliers; positive or negative association; linear or nonlinear
association; strong or weak association.
Connecting Benchmarks/Horizontal Alignment Terms from the K - 12 Glossary
• MA.8. AR.3 • Association
• Outlier
• Scatter Plot
Vertical Alignment
Previous Benchmarks Next Benchmarks
• MA.6.DP.1 • MA.912.DP. 2.4, MA.912.DP.2.6
• MA.7.DP.1 • MA. 912.DP.3.1
Purpose and Instructional Strategies
In grades 6 and 7, students described and interpreted, quantitatively and qualitatively, both
numerical and categorical univariate data. In g rade 8 , students encounter bivariate data, and they
use scatter plots to determine whether there is any association between the variables. In Algebra
1 , stud ents will continue working with scatter plots to display association, but expand their
knowledge to consider association in bivariate categorical data, displayed with frequency tables.
• Instruction includes students communicating the relationships between two variables.
Students should analyze scatter plots to determine the type and degree of association.
positive association negative association no association strong association
weak association nonlinear association
linear association
• Outliers in scatter plots are different than outliers in box plots. There is no special rule
determining if a data point is an outlier in a scatter plot. Instead, students need to
consider why the outlier does not fit the pattern. Students should examine if outliers are
valid or represent a recor ding or measurement error. Students should identify outliers and
clusters and give possible reasons for their existence ( MTR.4.1 , MTR.7.1 ).
• Instruction includes opportunities to discuss the effects of changing the data slightly and
how the changes impact the scatter plots ( MTR.4.1 ).
Common Misconceptions or Errors
• Students may invert positive and negative correlations.
• Students may incorrectly assume that associations can only have one descriptor.
o For example, students may only say that the correlation is a positive association
instead of describing it as a strong, positive linear association.
• Students may misinterpret an outlier and why it may occur in a set of data.
113 | Page

===== B1G-M-Grd8-TI · page 114 =====
Strategies to Support Tiered Instruction
• Teacher provides clear examples of associations of scatter plots (representing both strong
and weak associations). Teacher facilitates discussion about whether each association is
positive or negative.
Positive Association Negative Association No Association
• Teacher provides examples of different outliers and discusses with students why this
occurred. Creating this dialogue will help students begin to understand how outliers can
be used differently depending on the type of data collected, and what the data is intended
for.
• Instruction includes co - creating a graphic organizer to include examples of different
patterns to association. Categories include trends in association (positive, negative, no),
strength of association (strong, weak) and pattern of association (linear or nonlinear).
Instructional Tasks
Instructional Task 1 (MTR.4.1, MTR.7.1)
The graphs below show s the test scores of the students in Dexter's class. The first graph
shows the relationship between test scores and the amount of time the students spent
studying, and the second graph shows the relationship between test scores and shoe size.
Part A. Describe and explain the pattern of association for each of the graphs.
Part B. If you were to add an outlier to the first graph, describe the data point and what it
would mean in context.
Instructional Task 2 (MTR.4.1, MTR.7.1)
Population density measures are approximations of the number of people per square unit of
area. The following scatter plot represents data from each of the 50 states comparing
population (in millions) to land area (in 10,000 square miles) in 2012.
114 | Page

===== B1G-M-Grd8-TI · page 115 =====
Part A. Describe the type and degree of association between population and land area.
Part B. Discuss with a partner possible interpretations of your answer to Part A. Do you
think this would hold true for other countries?
Instructional Items
Instructional Item 1
The scatter plot below compares middle school students' scores on the Epworth Sleepiness
Scale (ESS) to their scores on a recent math test. The Epworth Sleepiness Scale measures
excessive daytime sleepiness with zero being least sleepy. Describe the type and degree of
association between scores on the Epworth Sleepiness Scale and scores on the math test.
*The strategies, tasks and items included in the B1G - M are examples and should not be consi dered comprehensive.
115 | Page

===== B1G-M-Grd8-TI · page 116 =====
MA.8. DP.1.3
Benchmark
MA.8.DP.1.3 Given a scatter plot with a linear association, informally fit a straight line.
Benchmark Clarifications:
Clarification 1: Instruction focuses on the connection to linear functions.
Clarification 2: Instruction includes using a variety of tools, including a ruler, to draw a line with
approximately the same number of points above and below the line.
Connecting Benchmarks/Horizontal Alignment Terms from the K - 12 Glossary
• MA.8.AR.3 • Association
• Line of Fit
• Scatter Plot
Vertical Alignment
Previous Benchmarks Next Benchmarks
• MA.6.DP.1 • MA.912.DP. 2.4, MA.912.DP.2.6
• MA.7.DP.1 • MA. 912.DP.3.1
Purpose and Instructional Strategies
In grades 6 and 7, students created graphical representations for both numerical and categorical
univariate data. In g rade 8, students encounter bivariate data displayed with scatter plots, and
they use their knowledge of graphing lines to determine approximate lines of fit . In Algeb ra 1 ,
students will continue working with scatter plots and lines of fit to display association, but
expand their knowledge to consider association in bivariate categorical data, displayed with
frequency tables.
• Instruction includes the understanding that a straight line can used to display a linear
association in a scatter plot . This line allows predictions of other potential data points .
Instruction includes students discussing what it means to be above and below the line of
fit ( MTR.4 .1 ).
• Instruction includes providing opportunities to look at multiple lines of fit and determine
which would be the be st model for the scatter plot. The use of manipulatives are a way
for students to make adjustments on their informal fit of a line. Stude nts should compare
and contrast their models and explain why their models best represent the fit of the data
( MTR.4.1 ).
• Instruction includes the use of linear models to represent the line of fit. Students should
describe the 𝑦 - intercept and slope in terms of the context within the scatter plot.
Common Misconceptions or Errors
• Students may incorrectly believe the line of fit should go through all the data points. To
address this misconception, provide examples to students to show some lines that do go
through data points and examples that may go through very few or no data point s.
• Students may incorrectly think the line of fit should go through the first and last data
point on the scatter plot. To address this misconception, provide examples to students to
show some lines that do not go through the first and last data point.
S trategies to Support Tiered Instruction
• Using digital tools to model graphing a line of fit will provide clarity for
misunderstanding that a line of fit needs to either start with the first and end with the last
point or go through all points.
116 | Page

===== B1G-M-Grd8-TI · page 117 =====
• Teacher provides examples to showing lines of fit that go through data points and
examples that may go through very few or no data points.
• Teacher provides examples to show lines of fit that do not go through the first and last
data point.
Instructional Tasks
Instructional Task 1 (MTR.6.1, MTR.7.1)
Each graph shows the same set of data and a line that has been fitted to the data.
Part A. Determine which line, 𝑎 , 𝑏 or 𝑐 , most appropriately fits the data and explain why.
Part B. What statistical question could be asked to represent the set of data?
Instructional Items
Instructional Item 1
The scatter plot below shows the relationship between the ages and weights of 50 female
infants. Draw a line on the scatter plot that fits the data.
Instructional Item 2
A scatter plot is shown in the coordinate plane. Draw a line on the scatter plot that fits the
data.
117 | Page

===== B1G-M-Grd8-TI · page 118 =====
*The strategies, tasks and items included in the B1G - M are examples and should not be considered comprehensive.
MA. 8 . DP . 2 Represent and find probabilities of repeated experiments.
MA.8. DP.2 .1
Benchmark
MA.8.DP.2.1 Determine the sample space for a repeated experiment.
Benchmark Clarifications:
Clarification 1: Instruction includes recording sample spaces for repeated experiments using organized
lists, tables or tree diagrams.
Clarification 2: Experiments to be repeated are limited to tossing a fair coin, rolling a fair die, picking a
card randomly from a deck with replacement, picking marbles randomly from a bag with replacement and
spinning a fair spinner.
Clarification 3: Repetition of experiments is limited to two ti mes except for tossing a coin.
Connecting Benchmarks/Horizontal Alignment Terms from the K - 12 Glossary
• Event
• Sample Space
Vertical Alignment
Previous Benchmarks Next Benchmarks
• MA.7.DP.2.1 • MA.912.DP.4.1
Purpose and Instructional Strategies
In grade 7, students determine d the sample space for a single experiment. In grade 8, students
find the sample space for a repeated experiment. In high school, students will describe events as
subsets of a sample space and consider unions, intersections and complements of events.
• For mastery of this benchmark, an experiment is an action that can have more than one
outcome. Experiments tend to have randomness, or uncertainty, in their outcomes.
o For example, an experiment can be the action of tossing a coin more than once.
Possible outc omes would be whether the coin lands on heads or lands on tails
each time.
• For mastery of this benchmark, repeated experiments are restricted to those listed in
Clarification 2 .
o Tossing a coin
Coins are not limited to those with heads or tails.
o Rolling a die
Dice are not limited to 6 - sided dice.
o Picking a card from a deck
Card decks are not limited to a standard 52 - card deck.
118 | Page

===== B1G-M-Grd8-TI · page 119 =====
o Picking a marble from a bag
Picking a marble from a bag is not limited to colors. Picking a tile, slip of paper,
or other objects from a bag are acceptable for this benchmark.
o Spinning a spinner
Spinning a spinner is not limited to colors.
• Due to some repeated experiments having a large sample space, instruction may focus on
repeating experiments that have at most 6 outcomes for each individual repetition.
o For example, rolling a 6 - sided die twice would have 6 outcomes for each
individual repetition giving 36 outcomes for the repeat ed experiment.
o For example, drawing a card with replacement twice from a deck containing 2 red
cards, 1 green card and 1 blue card would have 4 outcomes for each individual
repetition giving 16 outcomes for the repeated experiment.
o For example, tossing a coin three times would have 2 outcomes for each
individual repetition giving 8 outcomes for the repeated experiment.
• For repeating experiments that have more than 6 outcomes for each individual repetition,
students should understand that a written descri ption is likely the best way to describe the
sample space because complete lists, tables and tree diagrams become challenging.
• Instruction includes the understanding that when an experiment is repeated, the full
sample space is kept for each repetition . Fo r the experiments of drawing a card from a
deck or a marble from a bag, t his idea is referred to as “with replacement.”
o For example, if you are selecting a card from a deck that card must be returned to
the deck before selecting another card.
• Students s hould experience experiments before discussing the theoretical concept of
probability. Within this benchmark, students are creating a sample space for an
experiment that is repeated more than once.
o For example, students c ould roll a die or spin a spinner twice , or randomly select
a card from a deck or a marble from a bag twice, with replacement, or students
could toss a coin multiple times
• Students should informally explore the idea of likelihood, fairness, and chance while
building the meaning of a probability value. In this benchmark, all experiments are fair,
meaning that all of the individual outcomes are equally likely.
o For example , if the experiment is to draw a marble from a bag twice with
replacement, then each marble is equally likely to b e chosen on each draw.
• Have students practice making models to represent sample spaces to gain understanding
on how probabilities are determined. Use familiar tools, including virtual manipulatives
such as a coin, fair die, deck of cards and fair spinner (MTR.2.1) .
• For repeated experiments, a sample space will typically be represented by a list of
outcomes, a written description, a table or a tree diagram. Providing opportunities for
students to match situations and sample spaces will assist with building their ability to
visualize the sample space for any given experiment.
o For example, the repeated experiment of tossing a coin three times has the sample
space that can be written as:
▪ List
{HHH, HHT, HTH, HTT, THH, THT, TTH, TTT}
▪ Written Description
The c ollection of ordered triples in which each element is either H or T.
▪ Table
119 | Page

===== B1G-M-Grd8-TI · page 120 =====
This representation is not appropriate when an experiment is repeated
more than twice.
▪ Tree Diagram
Flip 0 Flip 1 Flip 2 Flip 3
Heads
Heads
Tails
Heads
Heads
Tails
Tails
Heads
Heads
Tails
Tails
Heads
Tails
Tails
o For example, the repeated experiment of drawing a marble twice from a bag
containing 2 red marbles (each notated as 𝑟 and 𝑟 in order to distinguish them)
1 2
and 1 blue marble (notated as b) has the sample space that can be written as:
▪ List
{ 𝑟 𝑟 , 𝑟 b, 𝑟 𝑟 , 𝑟 b, b 𝑟 , b 𝑟 , bb, 𝑟 𝑟 , 𝑟 𝑟 }.
1 2 1 2 1 2 1 2 1 1 2 2
▪ Written Description
The collection of ordered pairs in which each element is either r , r or b
1 2
(as shown in the list).
▪ Table
Red 1 Red 2 Blue
Red 1 R1, R1 R1, R2 R1, B
Red 2 R2, R1 R2, R2 R2, B
Blue B, R1 B, R2 B, B
▪ Tree Diagram (two options shown)
120 | Page

===== B1G-M-Grd8-TI · page 121 =====
Red 1,
Red 1
Red 1
Red 1,
Red 1 Red 2 Red 1
Red 2
Red 1,
Blue
Blue
Red 2,
Red 1
Red 1
Red 2,
Red 2 Red 2 Red 2
Red 2
Red 2,
Blue
Blue
Blue, Red
Red 1
1
Blue, Red
Blue Red 2 Blue
2
Blue Blue, Blue
Common Misconceptions or Errors
• Students may incorrectly organize the data using tables or tree diagrams. To address this
misconception, start with a small sample space first to ensure students understand the
process.
Strategies to Support Tiered Instruction
• Teacher provides examples of small sample spaces and discuss with students how the
options are logical, and where they come from. Once students begin to understand small
sample spaces, the teacher continues to increase size of sample spaces and have the same
conversations.
• Teacher provides examples of situations and has students decide on the sample space
necessary.
• Teacher co - creates models with students to represent samp le spaces using a coin, die,
spinner or a standard deck of cards.
• Instruction includes the use of real - world objects (coin, die, deck of cards, spinner,
marbles in a bag , etc. ) to demonstrate the possible outc omes for a single experiment and
then the possible outcomes if the experiment is repeated.
o For example, there are three marbles in a bag that are green, yellow and blue. The
sample space for the single experiment of drawing a marble in the bag can be
written as { 𝑔 , 𝑦 , 𝑏 } . If this experiment is repeated twice, the sample space could
be written as { 𝑔𝑔 , 𝑔𝑦 , 𝑔𝑏 , 𝑦𝑔 , 𝑦𝑦 , 𝑦𝑏 , 𝑏𝑔 , 𝑏𝑦 , 𝑏𝑏 } .
• Instruction includes starting with a small sample space first to ensure students understand
the process.
121 | Page

===== B1G-M-Grd8-TI · page 122 =====
Instructional Tasks
Instructional Task 1 (MTR.7.1)
Brianna flip s a round, flat game piece with yellow on one side and white on the other side.
Make a tree diagram to show the sample space for flipping the game piece four times.
Instructional Task 2 (MTR.4.1)
List or describe all of the possible outcomes for each experiment.
Experiment Sample Space
rolling a fair 6 - sided die two times
flipping a coin three times
pulling two cards from standard deck with
replacement
a spin from the spinner below two times
Compare your list with a partner and identify any differences. Allow each partner time to
discuss their reasoning until an agreement is reached on the correct sample space.
Instructional Items
Instructional Item 1
Joanna is spinning a spinner twice with 4 equal sections numbered 1 to 4. What are all the
possible outcomes in the sample space?
*The strategies, tasks and items included in the B1G - M are examples and should not be considered comprehensive.
MA.8. DP.2.2
Benchmark
MA.8.DP.2.2 Find the theoretical probability of an event related to a repeated experiment.
Benchmark Clarifications:
Clarification 1: Instruction includes representing probability as a fraction, percentage or decimal.
Clarification 2: Experiments to be repeated are limited to tossing a fair coin, rolling a fair die, picking a
card randomly from a deck with replacement, picking marbles randomly from a bag with replacement and
spinning a fair spinner.
Clarification 3: Repetition of exper iments is limited to two times except for tossing a coin.
Connecting Benchmarks/Horizontal Alignment Terms from the K - 12 Glossary
• Event
• Theoretical Probability
Vertical Alignment
Previous Benchmarks Next Benchmarks
• MA.7.DP.2.3
122 | Page

===== B1G-M-Grd8-TI · page 123 =====
• MA.912.DP.4.2 , MA.912.DP.4.3 ,
MA.912.DP.4. 7 , MA.912.DP.4. 8 ,
MA.912.DP.4.9
Purpose and Instructional Strategies
In grade 7, students found the theoretical probability of an event related to a simple experiment.
In grade 8, students will find the theoretical probability of an event rel ated to a repeated
experiment. In high school, students will determine theoretical probabilities, as well as
conditional probabilities, in more general experiments , using a variety of methods, including the
addition a nd multiplication rules.
• Instruction builds on finding sample spaces from MA. 8 .DP.2.1. Have students discuss
their understanding of the words “theor etical ” and “probability” to build toward a formal
definition of theoretical probability.
• Encourage students to use a variety of representations for the sample space, such as a
table, tree diagram or list, to assist in determining the total possible outcomes wh en
calculating the probability. Providing opportunities for students to match situations and
sample spaces will assist with building their ability to visualize the sample space for any
given experiment.
• When finding theoretical probability, have students work from their sample space. Doing
so will lead to the understanding that since experiments for this benchmark are fair, the
𝑛𝑢𝑚𝑏𝑒𝑟 𝑜𝑓 𝑜𝑢𝑡𝑐𝑜𝑚𝑒𝑠 𝑖𝑛 𝑡 ℎ 𝑒 𝑒𝑣𝑒𝑛𝑡
probability of an event is equivalent to .
𝑛𝑢𝑚𝑏𝑒𝑟 𝑜𝑓 𝑜𝑢𝑡𝑐𝑜𝑚𝑒 𝑠 𝑖𝑛 𝑡 ℎ 𝑒 𝑠𝑎𝑚𝑝𝑙𝑒 𝑠𝑝𝑎𝑐𝑒
o For example, if tossing a fair coin three times, the sample space is {HHH, HHT,
HTH, HTT, THH, THT, TTH, TTT} . If one wants to find 𝑃 ( 𝑎𝑡 𝑙𝑒𝑎𝑠𝑡 1 𝑡𝑎𝑖𝑙𝑠 ) ,
students can circle all of the outcomes in the samp le space that have at least one
7
T. Since there are 7 such outcomes, one can determine the probability as , or
8
87.5%.
• Instruction focuses on the experiments listed in Clarification 2 .
6
o For example, when rolling a 6 - sided die twice, 𝑃 ( 𝑟𝑜𝑙𝑙𝑖𝑛𝑔 𝑎 𝑠𝑢𝑚 𝑜𝑓 7 ) = . This
36
can be determined by looking at the table of outcomes and circling the 6 outcomes
that give a sum of 7.
o For example, when picking a card twice with replacement from a deck that
contains each of the five vowels of the alphabet (A, E, I, O and U) ,
𝑃 ( 𝑛𝑜𝑡 𝑝𝑖𝑐𝑘𝑖𝑛𝑔 𝑎𝑛 𝐴 ) = 0 . 64 . This can be determined by reasoning that there are
9 ways to draw an A, so there are 16 ways to not draw an A.
o For example, when spinning a spinner twice that contains 3 sections where two of
the sections are red and the other section is blue,
5
𝑃 ( 𝑠𝑝𝑖𝑛𝑛𝑖𝑛𝑔 𝑡 ℎ 𝑒 𝑠𝑎𝑚𝑒 𝑐𝑜𝑙𝑜𝑟 𝑡𝑤𝑖𝑐𝑒 ) = . This can be determined by looking at
9
the list { 𝑟 𝑟 , 𝑟 b, 𝑟 𝑟 , 𝑟 b, b 𝑟 , b 𝑟 , bb, 𝑟 𝑟 , 𝑟 𝑟 } and circling each of the four
1 2 1 2 1 2 1 2 1 1 2 2
outcomes that has the same color twice.
• Instruction includes discussing student understanding of the words “theor etical ” and
“probability” to develop a formal definition of theoretical probability.
• Instruction includes 𝑃 ( 𝑒𝑣𝑒𝑛𝑡 ) notation.
• Students should develop the understanding that the o rder in which the outcome (from the
simple experiment) occurs matters so tha t probabilities of the outcomes (from the
repeated experiment) are the same.
123 | Page

===== B1G-M-Grd8-TI · page 124 =====
o For example, if the simple experiment is to draw a marble out of bag (that
contains 1 blue, 1 green and 1 yellow marble), the outcomes for that simple
experiment are {B, G, Y}. If this experiment is repeated two times, there are now
nine outcomes: {BB, BG, BY, GG, GB, GY, YY, YB, YG}. If one wanted the
𝑃 ( 𝑑𝑟𝑎𝑤 𝑎𝑡 𝑙 𝑒 𝑎𝑠𝑡 1 𝑦𝑒𝑙𝑙𝑜𝑤 𝑚𝑎𝑟𝑏𝑙𝑒 ) , students should be able to see that the
drawing a yellow and then a green is as equally likely as drawing a green and then
a yellow. Therefore those are two distinct ou tcomes.
Common Misconceptions or Errors
• Students may incorrectly assume that all event s are equally likely. To help address this
misconception, reinforce that the likelihood of each event depends on the number of
outcomes in the event.
• Students may incorrectly convert forms of probability between fractions and percent age s.
To address this misconception, scaffold with more familiar values initially to facilitate
the interpretation of the data.
Strategies to Support Tiered Instruction
• Teacher encourages the use of precise language when working with simple experiments
and repeated experiments. Students should always note when discussing “outcomes” they
specify whether it is an outcome from a simple experiment, such as “heads”, or from a
repeated experiment, such as “heads, heads.”
• Teacher facilitates discussion to explain that the outcome for a repeated experiment (a
simple experiment that occurs more than once) consists of a sequence of outcomes that
occur in the repeated simple experim ent. Students should understand that the order in
which the outcomes of the simple experiment occurs matters when combining to form an
outcome of the repeated experiment.
o For example, if the simple experiment is to toss a coin once, the outcomes for that
simple experiment are {H, T}. If this experiment is repeated three times, there are
now eight outcomes, each of which is a sequence of Hs and Ts: {HHH, HHT,
HTH, HTT, THH, THT, TTH, TTT}. Note that order matters, for instance, HHT
is a different outcome than HTH or THH.
• Once students have correctly written the sample space, they can calculate the probability
by counting.
o For example, for the experiment of tossing a coin th ree times, the sample space
can be represented as {HHH, HHT, HTH, HTT, THH, THT, TTH, TTT}. If
students want to determine the probability of obtaining exactly one tails in this
experiment, they can look through the outcomes of the sample space and highligh t
all that have exactly one T: {HHH, HHT , HTH , HTT, THH , THT, TTH, TTT} .
Then, it can be observed that there are three out of eight highlighted. Therefore,
3
the probability is .
8
• Instruction includes the use of estimation to find the approximate decimal va lue of a
fraction or mixed number before rewriting in decimal form to help with correct
placement of the decimal point.
• Teacher co - creates a graphic organizer modeling conversions between fractions and
percentages to understand and visually comprehend the relationship of the equivalent
forms.
124 | Page

===== B1G-M-Grd8-TI · page 125 =====
• Teacher provides opportunities for students to use a 100 frame to review place value for
and the connections to decimal, fractional, and percentage forms.
Instructional Tasks
Instructional Task 1 (MTR.7.1)
A quiz contains 2 multiple - choice questions with five possible answers each, only one of
w hich is correct. A student plans to guess the answers.
Part A. What is the sample space?
Part B. What is the probability the student guess es wrong answers for both questions?
Part C. What is the probability the students guess es the correct answers for both
questions?
Part D. What is the probability the student guesses at least one correct answer.
Instructional Task 2 (MTR. 3 .1)
A fair 6 - sided die is tossed twice.
Part A. What is the sample space ?
Part B. Find the probability that the sum of the two results is even.
Instructional Items
Instructional Item 1
There are 3 red, 1 blue and 2 green marbles in a bag. A marble is randomly drawn from th e
bag twice, with replacement. What is the theoretical probability of choosing one red marble
and one green marble ?
Instructional Item 2
A fair coin is tossed four times. What is 𝑃 ( 𝑡𝑜𝑠𝑠𝑖𝑛𝑔 𝑎𝑡 𝑙𝑒𝑎𝑠𝑡 𝑡 ℎ 𝑟𝑒𝑒 ℎ 𝑒𝑎𝑑𝑠 ) ?
*The strategies, tasks and items included in the B1G - M are examples and should not be considered comprehensive.
125 | Page

===== B1G-M-Grd8-TI · page 126 =====
MA. 8.DP.2.3
Benchmark
Solve real - world problems involving probabilities related to single or repeated
MA.8.DP.2.3
experiments, including making predictions based on theoretical probability.
Example: If Gabriella rolls a fair die 300 times, she can predict that she will roll a 3
1
approximately 50 times since the theoretical probability is .
6
Example: Sandra performs an experiment where she flips a coin three times. She finds the
3
theoretical probability of landing on exactly one head as . If she performs this
8
experiment 50 times (for a total of 150 flips), predict the number of repetitions of the
exp eriment that will result in exactly one of the three flips landing on heads.
Benchmark Clarifications:
Clarification 1: Instruction includes making connections to proportional relationships and representing
probability as a fraction, percentage or decimal.
Clarification 2: Experiments to be repeated are limited to tossing a fair coin, rolling a fair die, picking a
card randomly from a deck with replacement, picking marbles randomly from a bag with replacement and
spinning a fair spinne r.
Clarification 3: Repetition of experiments is limited to two times except for tossing a coin.
Connecting Benchmarks/Horizontal Alignment Terms from the K - 12 Glossary
• MA.8.NSO.1.2 , MA.8. NSO.1.7 • T heoretical P robability
Vertical Alignment
Previous Benchmarks Next Benchmarks
• MA.7.DP.2 • MA.912.DP.4
Purpose and Instructional Strategies
In grade 7, students used a simulation of a simple experiment to find experimental probabilities
and compare them to theoretical probabilities. In grade 8, students solve real - world problems
involving probabilities related to single or repeated experiments , including making predictions
based on theoretical probability. In high school, students will expand their knowledge to include
more general experiments.
• Students should understand that results from an experiment do not always match the
theoretical result s, but if they do a large number of trials, they should be close.
• When determining experimental probabilities, students should understand that this may
be done by performing a simple experiment more than once and also by performing a
repeated experiment m ore than once.
o For example, to determine the experimental probability of tossing four heads in a
row, the repeated experiment of tossing a coin four times will need to be
performed many times (see also Benchmark Example 2 ).
• Instruction includes 𝑃 ( 𝑒𝑣𝑒𝑛𝑡 ) notation.
• Instruction includes opportunities for students to run various numbers of trials to discover
that the increased repetition of the experiment will bring the experimental probability
closer to the theoretical. Use virtual simulatio ns to quickly show higher and higher
volumes of repetition that would be difficult to create with physical manipulatives
(MTR.5.1) .
• When comparing theoretical to experimental probability, it is important to not just
compare the number of times the event occurs, but the probabilities themselves.
126 | Page

===== B1G-M-Grd8-TI · page 127 =====
Common Misconceptions or Errors
• Students may incorrectly assume the theoretical and experimental probabilities of the
same experiment will always be the same. To address this misconception, provide
multiple opportunities for students to experience simulations of different situations, wit h
physical or virtual manipulatives, in order to find and compare the experimental and
theoretical probabilities.
• Students may incorrectly expect to see every possible outcome occur during a simulation.
While all may occur in a simulation, it is not certai n to happen. Students may
inadvertently let their own experience with an experiment affect their response.
o For example , during an exp eriment if a student never draws an ace from a
standard deck of cards , this does not indicate it could never happen.
• Stude nts may incorrectly believe the theoretical probability of an event is the proportion
of times that event will actually occur.
Strategies to Support Tiered Instruction
• Teacher reviews the root words theoretical (theory) and experimental (experiment) and
discusses the difference between a theoretical probability and experimental probability.
Teacher provides graphic organizer to keep as reference for root words.
o For example, experimental probabilities are from simulations whereas theoretical
probabilities are from calculations.
• Teacher provides opportunities to discuss the difference between simulating simple
experiments and simulating repeated experiments.
o For example, students could discuss tossing a coin 150 times as a simulation of
the simple (single) experiment “tossing a coin” and tossing a coin 150 times as a
simulation of the repeated experiment “tossing a coin three times.” In the first
case, the simulat ion has 150 trials whereas the second simulation has 50 trials.
• Teacher sets up a simulation with several trials to work through and discuss what ‘we
think’ should happen (Theoretical Probability) and what actually happens when the
experiment is completed (Experimental Probability). Then, the teacher models how to
find experimental probability, showing how the more trials that are done, the closer the
results should get closer to the theoretical probability. Teacher provid es instruction
focused on color - co ding when setting up a proportional relationship to ensure
corresponding parts are placed in corresponding positions within the proportion.
o For example, if Jason choses a card from a standard deck of cards 104 times and
replaces the card each time, what is a reasonable prediction on how many times
he will choose a heart?
𝑛𝑢𝑚𝑏𝑒𝑟 𝑜𝑓 𝑜𝑢𝑡𝑐𝑜𝑚𝑒𝑠 𝑖𝑛 𝑡 ℎ 𝑒 𝑒𝑣𝑒𝑛𝑡 𝑝𝑟𝑒𝑑𝑖𝑐𝑡𝑒𝑑 𝑛 𝑢𝑚𝑏𝑒𝑟 𝑜𝑓 𝑜𝑢𝑡𝑐𝑜𝑚𝑒𝑠
=
𝑛𝑢𝑚𝑏𝑒𝑟 𝑜𝑓 𝑜𝑢𝑡𝑐𝑜𝑚𝑒𝑠 𝑖𝑛 𝑡 ℎ 𝑒 𝑠𝑎𝑚𝑝𝑙𝑒 𝑠𝑝𝑎𝑐𝑒 𝑛𝑢𝑚𝑏𝑒𝑟 𝑜𝑓 𝑡𝑟𝑖𝑎𝑙𝑠
13 ℎ 𝑒𝑎𝑟𝑡𝑠 𝑥 ℎ 𝑒𝑎𝑟𝑡𝑠 𝑝𝑟𝑒𝑑𝑖𝑐𝑡𝑒𝑑
=
52 𝑐𝑎𝑟𝑑𝑠 104 𝑡𝑟𝑖𝑎𝑙𝑠
• Instruction includes providing multiple opportunities to experience simulations of
different situations, with phys ical or virtual manipulatives , in order to find and compare
the experimental and theoretical probabilities.
Instructional Tasks
127 | Page

===== B1G-M-Grd8-TI · page 128 =====
Instructional Task 1 (MTR.5.1)
The bar graph shows the results of spinning the spinner 200 times.
Part A. If the repeated experiment is to spin the spinner twice, predict how many times
the event of landing on the same number twice will occur in 100 simulations of
the repeated exper iment.
Part B. Using technology, perform a simulation of the experiment described in Part A.
Part C. Compare the number of times you actually landed on the same number twice
during the simulation to your prediction from Part A.
Instructional Items
Instructional Item 1
If Jackson rolls a fair 6 - sided die 200 times, what is a reasonable prediction on how many
times he will roll a 4?
Instructional Item 2
A spinner is divided into three equal parts 1 - 3. The repeated experiment of spinning the
spinner twice is simulated 300 times. A table of outcomes is shown.
Outcome of the Repeated Number of Times Each
Experiment Outcome Occurred
1 , 1 27
1, 2 32
1, 3 39
2 , 1 20
2, 2 24
2, 3 39
3, 1 45
3, 2 38
3, 3 36
Based on the table, what is the experimental probab ility that the sum of the two outcomes is
at least 4 ?
*The strategies, tasks and items included in the B1G - M are examples and should not be considered comprehensive.
128 | Page
