
===== B1G-M-Grd7-TI · page 1 =====
Grade 7 B.E.S.T. Instructional Guide for Mathematics
The B.E.S.T. Instructional Guide for Mathematics (B1G - M) is intended to assist educators with
planning for student learning and instruction aligned to Florida’s Benchmarks for Excellent
Student Thinking (B.E.S.T.) Standards. This guide is designed to aid h igh - quality instruction
through the identification of components that support the learning and teaching of the B.E.S.T.
Mathematics Standards and Benchmarks. The B1G - M includes an analysis of information related
to the B.E.S.T. Standards for Mathematics wi thin this specific mathematics course, the
instructional emphasis and aligned resources. This document is posted on the B.E.S.T. Standards
for Math ematics webpage of the Florida Department of Education’s website and will continue to
undergo edits as needed.
Structural Framework and Intentional Design of the B.E.S.T. Standards for Mathematics
Florida’s B.E.S.T. Standards for Mathematics were built on the following.
• The coding scheme for the standards and benchmarks was changed to be consistent with
other content areas. The new coding scheme is structured as follows:
Content.GradeLevel.Strand.Standard.Benchmark.
• Strands were streamlined to be more consistent through out.
• The standards and benchmarks were written to be clear and concise to ensure that they
are easily understood by all stakeholders.
• The benchmarks were written to allow teachers to meet students’ individual skills,
knowledge and ability.
• The benchmarks were written to allow students the flexibility to solve problems using a
method or strategy that is accurate, generalizable and efficient depending on the content
(i.e., the numbers, expressions or equations).
• The benchmarks were written to allow for stud ent discovery (i.e., exploring) of strategies
rather than the teaching, naming and assessing of each strategy individually.
• The benchmarks were written to support multiple pathways for success in career and
college for students.
• The benchmarks should not be taught in isolation but should be combined purposefully.
• The benchmarks may be addressed at multiple points throughout the year, with the
intention of gaining mastery by the end of the year.
• Appropriate progression of content within and across strand s was developed for each
grade level and across grade levels.
• There is an intentional balance of conceptual understanding and procedural fluency with
the application of accurate real - world context intertwined within mathematical concepts
for relevance.
• The use of other content areas, like science and the arts, within real - world problems
should be accurate, relevant, authentic and reflect grade level appropriateness.

===== B1G-M-Grd7-TI · page 2 =====
Components of the B.E.S.T. Instructional Guide for Mathematics
The following table is an example of the layout for each benchmark and includes the defining
attributes for each component. It is important to note that instruction should not be limited to the
possible connecting benchmarks, related terms, strategies or examples provided. To do s o would
strip the intention of an educator meeting students’ individual skills, knowledge and abilities.
Benchmark
focal point for instruction within lesson or task
This section includes the benchmark as identified in the B.E.S.T. Standards for Mathematics .
The benchmark, also referred to a s the Benchmark of Focus, is the focal point for student
learning and instruction. The benchmark, and its related example(s) and clarification(s), can also
be found in the course description. The 9 - 12 benchmarks may be included in multiple courses,
select the example(s) or clarification(s) as appropriate for the identified course.
Connecting Benchmarks/Horizontal Alignment Terms from the K - 12 Glossary
in other standards within the grade level or course
This section includes a list of connecting This section includes terms from
benchmarks that relate horizontally to the Appendix C: K - 12 Glossary, found
Benchmark of Focus. Horizontal alignment is within the B.E.S.T. Standards for
the intentional progression of content within a Mathematics document, which are
grade level or course linking skills within and relevant to the identified Benchmark
across strands. Connecting benchmarks are of Focus. The terms included in this
benchmarks that eith er make a mathematical section should not be viewed as a
connection or include prerequisite skills. The comprehensive vocabulary list, but
information included in this section is not a instead should be considered during
comprehensive list, and educators are instruction or act as a reference for
encouraged to find other connecting educators.
benchmarks. Additionally, this list will not
include benchmarks fr om the same standard
since benchmarks within the same standard
already have an inherent connection.
Vertical Alignment
across grade levels or c ourses om the K - 12 glossary:
This section includes a list of related benchmarks that connect vertically to the Benchmark of
Focus. Vertical alignment is the intentional progression of content from one year to the next,
spanning across multiple grade levels. Benchmarks listed in this section make mathematical
connections from prior grade levels or courses in future grade levels or courses within and
across strands. If the Benchmark of Focus is a new concept or skill, it may not have any
previous benchmarks listed. Likewise, if the Benchmark of Focus is a mathematical skill or
concept that is finalized in learning and does not have any direct connection to future grade
levels or courses, it may not have any future benchmarks listed. The information included in
this section is not a comprehensive list, and educators are encouraged to find other benchmarks
within a vertical progression.
Purpose and Instructional Strategies
This section includes further narrative for instruction of the benchmark and vertical alignment.
Additionally, this section may also include the following:
2 | P a g e

===== B1G-M-Grd7-TI · page 3 =====
• explanations and details for the benchmark;
• vocabulary not provided within Appendix C;
• possible ins tructional strategies and teaching methods; and
• strategies to embed potentially related Mathematical Thinking and Reasoning Standards
(MTRs).
Common Misconceptions or Errors
This section will include common student misconceptions or errors and may include strategies
to address the identified misconception or error. Recognition of these misconceptions and errors
enables educators to identify them in the classroom and make efforts to correct the
misconception or error. This corrective effort in the cl assroom can also be a form of formative
assessment within instruction.
Strategies to Support Tiered Instruction
The instructional strategies in this section address the common misconceptions and errors listed
within the above section that can be a barrier to successfully learning the benchmark. All
instruction and intervention at Tiers 2 and 3 are intended to support students to be successful
with Tier 1 instruction. Strategies that support tiered instruction are intended to assist teachers
in plann ing across any tier of support and should not be considered exclusive or inclusive of
other instructional strategies that may support student learning with the B.E.S.T. Mathematics
Standards. For more information about tiered instruction, please see the Ef fective Tiered
Instruction for Mathematics: ALL Means ALL document.
Instructional Tasks
demonstrate the depth of the benchmark and the connection to the related benchmarks
This section will include example instructional tasks, which may be open - ended and are
intended to demonstrate the depth of the benchmark. Some instructional tasks include
integration of the Mathematical Thinking and Reasoning Standards (MTRs) and related
benchmark(s). Enrichment tasks may be included to make connections to benchmarks in later
grade levels or courses. Tasks may require extended time, additional materials and
collaboration.
Instructional Items
demonstrate the focus of the benchmark
This section will include example instructional items which may be used as evidence to
demonstrate the students’ understanding of the benchmark. Items may highlight one or more
parts of the benchmark.
*The strategies, tasks and items included in the B1G - M are examples and should not be considered comprehensive.
3 | P a g e

===== B1G-M-Grd7-TI · page 4 =====
Mathematical Thinking and Reasoning Standards
MTRs: Because Math Matters
Florida students are expected to engage with mathematics through the Mathematical Thinking
and Reasoning Standards (MTRs) by utilizing their language as a self - monitoring tool in the
classroom, promoting deeper learning and understanding of mathematics. Th e MTRs are
standards which should be used as a lens when planning for student learning and instruction of
the B.E.S.T. Standards for Mathematics.
Structural Framework and Intentional Design of the Mathematical Thinking and Reasoning
Standards
The Mathem atical Thinking and Reasoning Standards (MTRs) are built on the following.
• The MTRs have the same coding scheme as the standards and benchmarks; however,
they are written at the standard level because there are no benchmarks.
• In order to fulfill Florida’s unique coding scheme, the 5th place (benchmark) will always
be a “1” for t he MTRs.
• The B.E.S.T. Standards for Mathematics should be taught through the lens of the MTRs.
• At least one of the MTRs should be authentically and appropriately embedded throughout
every lesson based on the expectation of the benchmark(s).
• The bulleted language of the MTRs were written for students to use as self - monitoring
tools during daily instruction.
• The clarifications of the MTRs were written for teachers to use as a guide to inform their
instructional practices.
• The MTRs ensure that students st ay engaged, persevere in tasks, share their thinking,
balance conceptual understanding and procedures, assess their solutions, make
connections to previous learning and extended knowledge, and apply mathematical
concepts to real - world applications.
• The MT Rs should not stand alone as a separate focus for instruction, but should be
combined purposefully.
• The MTRs will be addressed at multiple points throughout the year, with the intention of
gaining mastery of mathematical skills by the end of the year and b uilding upon these
skills as they continue in their K - 12 education.
4 | P a g e

===== B1G-M-Grd7-TI · page 5 =====
MA.K12.MTR.1.1 Actively participate in effortful learning both individually and
collectively.
Mathematicians who participate in effortful learning both individually and with others:
• Analyze the problem in a way that makes sense given the task.
• Ask questions that will help with solving the task.
• Build perseverance by modifying methods as needed whi le solving a challenging task.
• Stay engaged and maintain a positive mindset when working to solve tasks.
• Help and support each other when attempting a new method or approach.
Clarifications:
Teachers who encourage students to participate actively in effor tful learning both individually
and with others:
• Cultivate a community of growth mindset learners.
• Foster perseverance in students by choosing tasks that are challenging.
• Develop students’ ability to analyze and problem solve.
• Recognize students’ effort when solving challenging problems.
MA.K12.MTR.2.1 Demonstrate understanding by representing problems in multiple
ways.
Mathematicians who demonstrate understanding by representing problems in multiple ways:
• Build understanding through modeling and using manipulatives.
• Represent solutions to problems in multiple ways using objects, drawings, tables, graphs
and equations.
• Progress from modeling problems with objects and drawings to using algorithms and
equations.
• Express connections between concepts and representations.
• Choose a representation based on the given context or purpose.
Clarifications:
Teachers who encourage students to demonstrate understanding by representing problems in
multiple ways:
• Help students make connections between concepts and representations.
• Provide opportunities for students to use manipulatives when investigating concepts.
• Guide stude nts from concrete to pictorial to abstract representations as understanding
progresses.
• Show students that various representations can have different purposes and can be
useful in different situations.
5 | P a g e

===== B1G-M-Grd7-TI · page 6 =====
MA.K12.MTR.3.1 Complete tasks with mathematical fl uency.
Mathematicians who complete tasks with mathematical fluency:
• Select efficient and appropriate methods for solving problems within the given context.
• Maintain flexibility and accuracy while performing procedures and mental calculations.
• Complete tasks accurately and with confidence.
• Adapt procedures to apply them to a new context.
• Use feedback to improve efficiency when performing calculations.
Clarifications:
Teachers who encourage students to complete tasks with mathemati cal fluency:
• Provide students with the flexibility to solve problems by selecting a procedure that
allows them to solve efficiently and accurately.
• Offer multiple opportunities for students to practice efficient and generalizable methods.
• Provide opportun ities for students to reflect on the method they used and determine if a
more efficient method could have been used.
MA.K12.MTR.4.1 Engage in discussions that reflect on the mathematical thinking of
self and others.
Mathematicians who engage in discussions that reflect on the mathematical thinking of self and
others:
• Communicate mathematical ideas, vocabulary and methods effectively.
• Analyze the mathematical thinking of others.
• Compare the efficiency of a method to t hose expressed by others.
• Recognize errors and suggest how to correctly solve the task.
• Justify results by explaining methods and processes.
• Construct possible arguments based on evidence.
Clarifications:
Teachers who encourage students to engage in discussions that reflect on the mathematical
thinking of self and others:
• Establish a culture in which students ask questions of the teacher and their peers, and
error is an opportunity for learning.
• Create opportunities for students to discuss their think ing with peers.
• Select, sequence and present student work to advance and deepen understanding of
correct and increasingly efficient methods.
• Develop students’ ability to justify methods and compare their responses to the
responses of their peers.
6 | P a g e

===== B1G-M-Grd7-TI · page 7 =====
MA. K12.MTR.5.1 Use patterns and structure to help understand and connect
mathematical concepts.
Mathematicians who use patterns and structure to help understand and connect mathematical
concepts:
• Focus on relevant details within a problem.
• Create plans and procedures to logically order events, steps or ideas to solve problems.
• Decompose a complex problem into manageable parts.
• Relate previously learned concepts to new concepts.
• Look for similarities among problems.
• Connect solutions of probl ems to more complicated large - scale situations.
Clarifications:
Teachers who encourage students to use patterns and structure to help understand and connect
mathematical concepts:
• Help students recognize the patterns in the world around them and connect these
patterns to mathematical concepts.
• Support students to develop generalizations based on the similarities found among
problems.
• Provide opportunities for students to create plans and procedures to solve problems.
• Develop students’ ability to construct relationships between their current understanding
and more sophisticated ways of thinking.
MA.K12.MTR.6.1 Assess the reasonableness of solutions.
Mathematicians who assess the reasonableness of solutions:
• Estimate to discover possible solutions.
• Use benchmark quantities to determine if a solution makes sense.
• Check calculations when solving problems.
• Verify possible solutions by explaining the methods used.
• Evaluate results based on the given context.
Clarifications:
Teachers who encourage students to assess the reasonableness of solutions:
• Have students estimate or predict solutions prior to solving.
• Prompt students to continually ask, “Does this solution make sense? How do you
know?”
• Reinforce that students check th eir work as they progress within and after a task.
• Strengthen students’ ability to verify solutions through justifications.
7 | P a g e

===== B1G-M-Grd7-TI · page 8 =====
MA.K12.MTR.7.1 Apply mathematics to real - world contexts.
Mathematicians who apply mathematics to real - world contexts:
• Connect mathematical concepts to everyday experiences.
• Use models and methods to understand, represent and solve problems.
• Perform investigations to gather data or determine if a method is appropriate.
• Redesign models and methods to improve accuracy or ef ficiency.
Clarifications:
Teachers who encourage students to apply mathematics to real - world contexts:
• Provide opportunities for students to create models, both concrete and abstract, and
perform investigations.
• Challenge students to question the accuracy of their models and methods.
• Support students as they validate conclusions by comparing them to the given situation.
• Indicate how various concepts can be applied to other disciplines.
8 | P a g e

===== B1G-M-Grd7-TI · page 9 =====
Examples of Teacher and Student Moves for the MTRs
Below are examples that demonstrate the embedding of the MTRs within the mathematics
classroom. The provided teacher and student moves are examples of how some MTRs could be
incorporated into student learning and instruction keeping in mind the benchmark(s) tha t are the
focal point of the lesson or task. The information included in this table is not a comprehensive
list, and educators are encouraged to incorporate other teacher and student moves that support
the MTRs.
MTR Student Moves Teacher Moves
MA.K12.MTR.1.1
• Students engage in the task • Teacher provides flexible
Actively participate through individual analysis, options (i.e., differentiated,
in effortful learning
student - to - teacher interaction challenging tasks that allow
both individually and student - to - student students to actively pursue a
and collectively. interaction. solution both individually and in
• Students ask task - appropriate groups) so that all students have
the opp ortunity to access and
questio ns to self, the teacher and
to other students. (MTR.4.1) engage with instruction, as well
as demonstrate their learning.
• Students have a positive
productive struggle exhibiting • Teacher creates a physical
environment that supports a
growth mindset, even when
making a mistake. growth mindset and will ensure
positive student engagement and
• Students stay engaged in the
collaboration.
task to a purposeful conclusion
while modifying methods, when • Teacher provides constructive,
enc ouraging feedback to
necessar y, in solving a problem
through self - analysis and students that recognizes their
perseverance. efforts and the value of analysis
and revision.
• Teacher provides appropriate
time for student processing,
productive struggle and
reflection.
• Teacher uses data and questions
to focus students on their
th inking; help students
determine their sources of
struggle and to build
understanding.
• Teacher encourages students to
ask appropriate questions of
other students and of the teacher
including questions that
examine accuracy. (MTR.4.1)
9 | P a g e

===== B1G-M-Grd7-TI · page 10 =====
MTR Student Moves Teacher Moves
MA.K12.MTR.2.1
• Students represent problems • Te acher provides students with
Demonstrate concretely using objects, models objects, models, manipulatives,
understanding by
and manipulatives. appropriate technology and real -
representing world situations. (MTR.7.1)
• Students represent problems
problems in
pictorially using drawings, • Teacher encourages students to
multiple ways.
models, tables and graphs. use drawings, models, tables,
• Studen ts represent problems expressions, equations and
graphs to represent problems
abstractly using numerical or
algebraic expressions and and solutions.
equations. • Te acher questions students
about making connections
• Students make connections and
between different
select among different
representations and methods for representations and methods and
challenges students to choose
the same problem, as
appropriate to different one that is most appropriate to
the context. (MTR.3.1)
situations or context. (MTR.3.1)
• Teacher encourages students to
explain their different
representations and methods to
each other. (MTR.4.1)
• Teacher provides opportunities
for students to choose
appropriate methods and to use
mathematical technology.
MA.K12.MTR.3.1
• Students complete tasks with • Teacher pr ovides tasks and
Complete tasks with flexibility, efficiency and opportunities to explore and
mathematical accuracy. share different methods to solve
fluency.
• Students use feedback from problems. (MTR.1.1)
peers and teachers to reflect on • Teacher provides opportunities
and revise methods used. for students to choose methods
• Students build confidence and reflect (i.e., through error
analysis, revision, summarizing
through practice in a variety of
contexts and problems. methods or writing) on the
(MTR.1.1) ef ficiency and accuracy of the
method(s) chosen.
• Teacher asks questions and
gives feedback to focus student
thinking to build efficiency of
accurate methods.
• Teacher offers multiple
opportunities to practice
generalizable methods.
10 | P a g e

===== B1G-M-Grd7-TI · page 11 =====
MTR Student Moves Teacher Moves
MA.K12.MTR.4.1
• Students use content specific • Teacher provides students with
Engage in language to communicate and opportunities (through open -
discussions that
justify mathematical ideas and ended tasks, questions and class
reflect on the chosen methods. structure) to make sense of their
mathematical thinking. (MTR.1.1)
• Students use discussions and
thinking of self and
reflections to recognize errors • Teacher uses precise
others.
and r evise their thinking. mathematical language, both
written and ab stract, and
• Students use discussions to
analyze the mathematical encourages students to revise
their language through
thinking of others.
discussion.
• Students identify errors within
• Teacher creates opportunities
their own work and then
determine possible reasons and for students to discuss and
reflect on their choice of
potential corrections.
methods, their errors and
• When working in small groups,
revisions and their justifications.
students recognize errors of their
• Teachers select, sequence and
peers and offers suggestions.
present student work to elicit
discussion about different
methods and representations.
(MTR.2.1, MTR.3.1)
MA.K12.MTR.5.1
• Students identify relevant details • Teacher asks questions to help
Use patterns and in a problem in order to create students construct relationships
structure to help
plans and decompose problems between familiar and unfamiliar
understand and into manageable parts. prob lems and to transfer this
connect
• Students find similarities and relationship to solve other
mathematical common structures, or patterns, problems. (MTR.1.1)
concepts.
between problems in order to • Teacher provides students
solve related and more complex opportunities to connect prior
problems using prior and current understanding to
knowledge. new concepts.
• Teacher provides opportunities
for students to discuss and
develop generalizatio ns about a
mathematical concept.
(MTR.3.1, MTR.4.1)
• Teacher allows students to
develop an appropriate sequence
of steps in solving problems.
• Teacher provides opportunities
for students to reflect during
problem solving to make
connections to problems in o ther
contexts, noticing structure and
making improvements to their
process.
11 | P a g e

===== B1G-M-Grd7-TI · page 12 =====
MTR Student Moves Teacher Moves
MA.K12.MTR.6.1
• Students estimate a solution, • Teacher provides opportunities
Assess the including using benchmark for students to estimate or
reasonableness of
quantities in place of the original predict solutions prior to
solutions. numbers in a problem. solving.
• Student s monitor calculations, • Teacher encourages students to
procedures and intermediate compare results to estimations
results during the process of and revise if necessary for future
solving problems. situations. (MTR.5.1)
• Students verify and check if • Teacher pro mpts students to
solutions are viable, or self - monitor by continually
reasonable, within the context or asking, “Does this solution or
situation. (MTR.7.1) intermediate result make sense?
• Students reflect on the accuracy How do you know?”
of their esti mations and their • Teacher encourages students to
solutions. provide explanations and
justifications for results to self
and others. (MTR.4.1)
MA.K12.MTR.7.1 • Students connect mathematical • Teacher provides real - world
Apply mathematics
concepts to everyday context to help students build
to real - world experiences. unde rstanding of abstract
contexts. mathematical ideas.
• Students use mathematical
models and methods to • Teacher encourages students to
understand, represent and solve assess the validity and accuracy
real - world problems. of mathematical models and
• Students investigate, research situations in real - world context,
and gather data to determine if a and to revise those models if
necessary.
mathematical model is
appropriate for a given situation • Teacher provides opportunities
from the world around them. for students to investigate,
research and gather data to
• Students re - design models and
methods to improve accuracy or determine if a mathematical
model is appropriate for a given
efficiency.
situation from the world around
them.
• Teacher provides opportunities
for students to apply concepts to
other content areas.
12 | P a g e

===== B1G-M-Grd7-TI · page 13 =====
Grade 7 Areas of Emphasis
In Grade 7 , instructional time will emphasize five areas:
(1) recognizing that fractions, decimals and percentages are different representations of
rational numbers and performing all four operations with rational numbers with
procedural fluency ;
(2) creating equivalent expressions and solving equations and inequalities;
(3) developing understanding of and applying proportional relationships in two variables ;
(4) extending analysis of two - and three - dimensional figures to include circles and
cylinders ; and
(5) representing and comparing categorical and numerical data and devel oping
understanding of probability.
The purpose of the areas of emphasis is not to guide specific units of learning and instruction, but
rather provide insight on major mathematical topics that will be covered within this mathematics
course. In addition to its purpose, the areas of emphasis are built on the following.
• Supports the intentional horizontal progression within the strands and across the strands
in this grade level or course.
• Student learning and instruction should not focus on the stated are as of emphasis as
individual units.
• Areas of emphasis are addressed within standards and benchmarks throughout the course
so that students are making connections throughout the school year.
• S ome benchmarks can be organized within more than one area.
• Supports the communication of the major mathematical topics to all stakeholders.
• Benchmarks within the areas of emphasis should not be taught within the order in which
they appear. To do so would strip the progression of mathematical ideas and miss the
opportunity to enhance horizontal progressions within the grade level or course.
The table below shows how the benchmarks within this mathematics course are embedded
within the areas of emphasis.
Operations Equivalent Categorical
Area and
with and Expressions Two - variable and
Volume of
Representing and Solving Proportional Numerical
Geometric
Rational Equations and Relationships Data and
Figures
Numbers Inequalities Probability
MA.7.NSO.1.1 x x
Sense MA.7.NSO.1.2 x x x x x
and MA.7.NSO.2.1 x x x x x
MA.7.NSO.2.2 x x x x x
Number
x
MA.7.NSO.2.3 x x x x
x x
A l MA.7.AR.1.1
13 | P a g e

===== B1G-M-Grd7-TI · page 14 =====
Operations Equivalent Categorical
Area and
with and Expressions Two - variable and
Volume of
Representing and Solving Proportional Numerical
Geometric
Rational Equations and Relationships Data and
Figures
Numbers Inequalities Probability
x x
MA.7.AR.1.2
x x
MA.7.AR.2.1
x x x x x
MA.7.AR.2.2
x x x x
MA.7.AR.3.1
x x x x
MA.7.AR.3.2
x x x
MA.7.AR.3.3
x x
MA.7.AR.4.1
x x
MA.7.AR.4.2
x x
MA.7.AR.4.3
x x
MA.7.AR.4.4
MA.7.AR.4.5 x x x
x x
MA.7.GR.1.1
x x
MA.7.GR.1.2
x x x x
MA.7.GR.1.3
x x x
MA.7.GR.1.4
x x x x
MA.7.GR.1.5
x x
MA.7.GR.2.1
x x x
Geometric Reasoning MA.7.GR.2.2
x x x
MA.7.GR.2.3
x x
MA.7.DP.1.1
x x
MA.7.DP.1.2
x x x
MA.7.DP.1.3
x x x
MA.7.DP.1.4
x x
MA.7.DP.1.5
x x
MA.7.DP.2.1
x x
MA.7.DP.2.2
x x
MA.7.DP.2.3
Data Analysis & Probability
x x x
MA.7.DP.2.4
14 | P a g e

===== B1G-M-Grd7-TI · page 15 =====
Number Sense and Operations
MA.7.NSO.1 Rewrite numbers in equivalent forms .
MA. 7 .NSO.1.1
Benchmark
Know and apply the Laws of Exponents to evaluate numerical expressions and
MA.7.NSO.1.1 generate equivalent numerical expressions, limited to whole - number exponents
and rational number bases.
Benchmark Clarifications :
Clarification 1: Instruction focuses on building the Laws of Exponents from specific examples. Refer to
the K - 12 Formulas (Ap pendix E) for the Laws of Exponents.
𝑛
𝑎
𝑝
Clarification 2: Problems in the form = 𝑎 must result in a whole - number value for 𝑝 .
𝑎 𝑚
Connecting Benchmarks/Horizontal Alignment Terms from the K - 12 Glossary
• MA.7.NSO.2.1 • B ase (of an exponent)
• MA.7.GR.1.4 • E xponent (exponential form)
• MA.7.GR.2.2 , MA.7.GR.2.3 • R ational N umber
• W hole N umber
Vertical Alignment
Previous Benchmarks Next Benchmarks
• MA.6.NSO.3.3 , MA.6.NSO.3.4 • MA.8.NSO.1.3
• MA.8.AR.1.1
Purpose and Instructional Strategies
In grade 6, students evaluated positive rational numbers and integers with natural number
exponents. In grade 7, students build on this to evaluate numerical expressions and generate
equivalent numerical expressions with positive and negative rational numb ers having whole -
number exponents. In grade 8, students will reach procedural fluency with evaluating numerical
expressions with positive and negative bases and integer exponents.
• Instruction includes allowing students to develop the Laws of Exponents based on
patterns emerging from a series of examples related to each Law of Exponents
( MTR.5.1 ).
• Develop understanding of the zero exponent by using multiplication to increase values
and division to decre ase values ( MTR.5.1 ).
3 2 2 1
o For example, to show decreasing values, 5 ÷ 5 = 5 and then 5 ÷ 5 = 5 (or 5)
1 0
and then 5 ÷ 5 = 5 (or 5 ÷ 5 = 1 ).
Patterns in Exponents
5
5 5 ∙ 5 ∙ 5 ∙ 5 ∙ 5
4
5 5 ∙ 5 ∙ 5 ∙ 5
3
5 5 ∙ 5 ∙ 5
2
5 ∙ 5
5
1
5 5
0
5 1
• Full expansion of exponents, limited to whole number exponents and rational number
bases, should be modeled to help develop these patterns.
15 | P a g e

===== B1G-M-Grd7-TI · page 16 =====
• Students should develop fluency with and without the use of a calculator when evaluating
numerical expressions involving the Laws of Exponents.
• Instruction includes cases where students must work backwards as well as cases where
the value of a variable mu st be determined ( MTR.3.1 ). Students should use relational
thinking as well as algebraic thinking.
𝑛
7
o For example, in = 343 , what is the value of 𝑛 ? Students should ask
2
7
3
themselves, “ If I know that 343 is 7 , what value would 𝑛 need to be so that 𝑛 −
2 = 3 ?”
2 𝑛 10
o For example, in ( 5 ) = 5 , what is the value of 𝑛 ? Students should ask
2 10
themselves, “What power would 5 be raised to equal 5 ?”
Common Misconceptions or Errors
• Students may incorrectly conclude that squaring a number means to multiply by 2.
Likewise, cubing may be mistaken as multiplying by 3. Use length to show doubling and
area of a square to show an exponent of 2. Use of two - dimensional and three - dimensional
m anipulatives (MTR.2.1) may also help to emphasize squares and cubes versus increasing
length.
• When finding the product or quotient of powers, students may incorrectly multiply or
divide the bases, rather than only manipulating the exponents. Use full expan sion of the
exponential expression (MTR.2.1) to develop the laws.
• Students may incorrectly invert the product of powers and power of a power laws,
wanting to multiply in the first and add in the latter.
Strategies to Support Tiered Instruction
• Instruction includes modeling the differences between doubling and squaring a value.
Doubling a value would be represented by multiplying a given length by 2 whereas
squaring a number would be represented by the area of a square with a given length.
o For example, students can be given the table below to show how the left column
doubles a length whereas the right column squares a length.
Given length of 5 Given length of 5
2
Re presenting 5 ∙ 2 Representing 5
• Instruction includes modeling the differences between tripling or cubing a value. Tripling
a value would be represented by multiplying a given length by 3, whereas cubing a
number would be represented by the volume of a cube with a given length.
o For example, students can be given the table below to show how the left column
triples a length whereas the right column cubes a length.
Given length of 5 Given length of 5
16 | P a g e

===== B1G-M-Grd7-TI · page 17 =====
Representing 5 ∙ 3
3
Representing 5
• The teacher provides opportunities for students who incorrectly apply the Laws of
Exponents when gener ating equivalent numerical expressions to use full expansion of
exponential expression as an additional step to v isually represent the emerging patterns.
3 2
o For example, the expression 4 ⋅ 4 can be expanded to ( 4 ⋅ 4 ⋅ 4 ) ⋅ ( 4 ⋅ 4 ) which
5
is equivalent to 4 ⋅ 4 ⋅ 4 ⋅ 4 ⋅ 4 or 4 . This helps illustrate the product of powers
Law.
• Teacher creates and posts an anchor chart with visual representations of the base of an
exponent, exponent and any factor (s) then encourages students to utilize the anchor chart
to assist in correct academic vocabulary when evaluating exponential expressio ns.
3 2
o For example, the teacher can highlight different parts of the expression 4 ⋅ 4 in
3 2
different colors to visualize the base , exponents and factors : 4 · 4 .
• Instruction includes co - creating a graphic organizer for each of the Laws of Exponents to
include the name of the law, an original exponential expression, an equivalent expansion
of the expression, the equivalent simplified expression, and a generalized rule for each of
the laws.
o For example, a graphic organizer with some of the Laws is shown.
Original Possible Equivalent Equivalent
Generalized
Law Exponential Expansion(s) of Simplified
Rule
Expression Expression Expression
2
( 4 ⋅ 4 ⋅ 4 )
Power
3 2 6 𝑚 𝑛 𝑚 ⋅ 𝑛
of a ( 4 ) ( 4 ⋅ 4 ⋅ 4 ) ( 4 ⋅ 4 ⋅ 4 ) 4 ( 𝑎 ) = 𝑎
3 3
Power ( 4 ) ( 4 )
4 4 4 4
⋅ ⋅ ⋅
Power
4 4 𝑚 𝑚
5 5 5 5 𝑎 𝑎
4 4
of a ( ) =
( )
4 𝑚
5 4 ⋅ 4 ⋅ 4 ⋅ 4 5 𝑏 𝑏
Quotient
5 ⋅ 5 ⋅ 5 ⋅ 5
Instructional Tasks
Instructional Task 1 (MTR.5.1)
Complete the table by using numeric examples to develop a rule for each of the situations
given. Then confirm or adjust your hypothesis as one of the Laws of Exponents.
17 | P a g e

===== B1G-M-Grd7-TI · page 18 =====
Instructional Items
Instructional Item 1
Generate an equivalent expression.
2 3
1 1
( ) ∙ ( )
2 2
Instructional Item 2
Evaluate the following expression.
2 3 3
1 1
( ( ) ) ∙ ( )
4 4
Instructional Item 3
Evaluate the following expression.
4 3 2 3
( 8 ) ∙ 5 ∙ 5
7 4
8 ∙ ( 8 ∙ 5 )
*The strategies, tasks and items included in the B1G - M are examples and should not be considered comprehensive.
18 | P a g e

===== B1G-M-Grd7-TI · page 19 =====
MA.7.NSO.1.2
Benchmark
Rewrite rational numbers in different but equivalent forms including
MA.7.NSO.1.2 fractions, mixed numbers, repeating decimals and percentages to solve
mathematical and real - world problems.
17
Example: Justin is solving a problem where he computes and his calculator gives him the
3
17
answer 5.6666666667. Justin makes the statement that = 5 . 6666666667 ; is he
3
correct?
Connecting Benchmarks/Horizontal Alignment Terms from the K - 12 Glossary
• MA.7.NSO.2 • R ational N umber
• MA.7.AR.1.2
• MA.7.AR.3
• MA.7.GR.1
• MA.7.GR.2
• MA.7.DP.1
• MA.7.DP.2
Vertical Alignment
Previous Benchmarks Next Benchmarks
• MA.6.NSO.1.1 , MA.6.NSO.1.2 • MA.8.NSO.1.1 , MA.8.NSO .1.2
• MA.6.NSO.3.5
Purpose and Instructional Strategies
In grade 6, students rewr o te positive rational numbers in different but equivalent forms as long as
the decimal form i s terminating . This expectation expands to all rational numbers in grade 7,
including those with repeating decimals , as well as using this skill to solve mathematical and
real - world problems. In grade 8, students will learn about irrational numbers as well as working
to plot, order and compare rational and irrational numbers.
• When solving problems with numbers written in various forms, students must be able to
convert between these forms to perform operations or make comparisons ( MTR.2.1 ) .
• Students should begin to develop charts , like the one below, that allow them to find
patterns within the different forms of rational numbers. Students should have common
fractions, decimals and percentages at their disposal in order to move to ones that are
more difficult to determine.
Fraction Mixed Number Decimal Percentage
• Students should have practice with and without the use of technology to rewrite rational
numbers in different but equivalent forms.
• Students should work with simple problems to showcase how truncating repeated
decimals may result in incorrect solutions.
1
o For example, using the fractional value of may provide a more precise answer
3
than using the truncated decimal of 0.33.
• Students should use reasonableness to determine if it is approp riate to use a specific
equivalent form over another one when problem solving ( MTR.6.1 ).
19 | P a g e

===== B1G-M-Grd7-TI · page 20 =====
Common Misconceptions or Errors
• Students may not differentiate between terminating decimals, repeating decimals and
rounded decimals , and they may not use them appropriately with in the given contexts.
• Students may incorrectly truncate repeating decimals when problem solving.
• Students may incorrectly divide when the quotient is not a whole number.
o For example, students may use the remainder of a problem as a decimal
representation.
Strategies to Support Tiered Instruction
• Instruction includes the use of estimation to find the approximate decimal value of a
fraction or mixed number before rewriting in decimal form to help with correct
placement of the decimal point.
• Teacher provides opportunities for students to explore and discuss the differences
between repeating and truncated decimals and the impact of truncating repeating
decimals when solving problems.
1
o For example, provide students with the equation 𝑦 = 𝑥 and have them create a
3
1
table of values comparing using , 0.3, 0.333 and 0.33333 as the constant of
3
proportionality. Students can discuss the differences in 𝑦 - values and importance
of using exact va lues in some cases and approximate values in others .
𝟏
𝒙 𝒚 = 𝒙 𝒚 = 𝟎 . 𝟑𝒙 𝒚 = 𝟎 . 𝟑𝟑𝟑𝒙 𝒚 = 𝟎 . 𝟑𝟑𝟑𝟑𝟑𝒙
𝟑
1
1 = 0 . 3 ̅ 0.3 0.333 0.33333
3
3 1 0.9 0.999 0.99999
5
5  ̅ 1.5 1.665 1.66665
= 1 . 6
3
6 2 1.8 1.998 1.99998
• Instruction includes co - creating a graphic organizer to highlight the differences between
terminating decimals, repeating decimals, and rounded decimals.
Instructional Tasks
Instructional Task 1 (MTR.2.1)
Convert each of the following to an equivalent form in order to compare their values.
1 1 9
̅
− 0 . 4 65% − 2 5 . 75 123% 2 . 3
5 3 7
Part A. Graph the numbers on a number line to determine increasing order.
Part B. Robin plotted her number line using all decimals, whereas Courtney plotted them
using the original forms. Describe why both would be acceptable answers.
Instructional Task 2 (MTR.2.1, MTR.4.1, MTR.5.1)
20 | P a g e

===== B1G-M-Grd7-TI · page 21 =====
Complete the table to identify equivalent forms of each number. Explain how you
approached your solutions. Prompting questions: What patterns did you use? How did
you start? Which values in the table are you most comfortable in starting with?
Mixe d Number
Fraction Decimal Percentage
(if applicable)
1
− 4
3
0 . 125
29
7
8
− − 32%
25
7
 ̅
2 2 . 7
9
Instructional Items
Instructional Item 1
All of the students in first period were given a glue stick to help build their interactive
2
notebook. Benny said he has already used of his glue while Juniper has used 70% of hers.
3
Which student has the most glue remaining for their notebooks?
Instructional Item 2
Ishana manages a corner store and wishes to give a discount to her customers for the holiday.
If she subtracts 0.15 of the cost of any item in the store, what percent should her sale sign
promote?
Instructional Item 3
7
Write three equivalent forms for 5 .
8
*The strategies, tasks and items included in the B1G - M are examples and should not be considered comprehensive.
21 | P a g e

===== B1G-M-Grd7-TI · page 22 =====
MA.7.NSO.2 Add, subtract, multiply and divide rational numbers .
MA.7.NSO.2.1
Benchmark
Solve mathematical problems using multi - step order of operations with
MA.7.NSO.2.1 rational numbers including grouping symbols, whole - number exponents and
absolute value.
Benchmark Clarifications:
Clarification 1: Multi - step expressions are limited to 6 or fewer steps.
Connecting Benchmarks/Horizontal Alignment Terms from the K - 12 Glossary
• MA.7.NSO.1 • A bsolute V alue
• MA.7.AR.1 • E xponent
• MA.7.GR.1 • O rder of O perations
• MA.7.GR.2 • R ational N umber
Vertical Alignment
Previous Benchmarks Next Benchmarks
• MA.6.NSO.1.4 • MA.8.NSO.1.5 , MA.8.NSO.1.7
• MA.6.AR.1.3
Purpose and Instructional Strategies
In grade 6, students evaluated algebraic expressions using substitution and order of operations
with integers, including use of absolute value and nat ural number exponents. In grade 7, students
move to multi - step order of operations with rational numbers including grouping symbols,
whole - number exponents and absolute value. In grade 8, students will solve problems involving
order of operations involving radicals.
• Number sense and properties of operations should be emphasized during instruction as
this benchmark is the completion of operations with rational numbers.
• Remind students that subtraction is addition of an opposite and division is multiplication
by a reciprocal when working with order of operations ( MTR.3.1 ).
• Avoid mnemonics, such as PEMDAS, that do not account for other grouping symbols
and do not exercise proper number sense that allows for calculating accurately in a
different order.
• Instruction includes the use of technology to help emphasize the proper use of grouping
symbols for order of operations.
• With the completion of operations with rational numbers in grade 7, students should have
experience using technology with decimals and fractions as they occur in the real world.
This experience will help to prepare students working with irrational numbers in grade 8.
Common Misconceptions or Errors
• Students may confuse when parentheses are used for grouping or multiplication.
• Some students may incorrectly apply the order of operations. In order to support students
in moving beyond this misconception, be sure to review operations with rational numbers
and order of operations.
Strategies to Support Tiered Instruction
22 | P a g e

===== B1G-M-Grd7-TI · page 23 =====
• Instruction includes the use of colors to highlight each step of the process used to
evaluate an expression.
• Teacher co - creates a graphic organizer for different grouping symbols and provides
examples when the grouping symbols indicate operator symbols.
o For example, students can be given the expressions below and discuss similarities
and differences.
4 4 4
( + 9 ) + 87 ( + 9 ) 87 ( + 9 ) − 87
6 6 6
4 4 4
( + 9 ) ( + 87 ) ( + 9 ) ( 87 ) ( + 9 ) ( − 87 )
6 6 6
• Instruction includes reviewing operations with rational numbers and order of operations.
Instructional Tasks
Instructional Task 1 (MTR.4.1, MTR.5.1)
Part A. Using the integers – 6 to 6 at most once, fill in the boxes to create an expression with
the lowest value.
( − | − | )
Part B. Compare your value with those in your group. Who has the lowest value? E xplain
why this value was less than the others.
Instructional Task 2 (MTR.3.1, MTR.4.1)
4
3
| ( 24 ) − 21 |
4
Part A. Evaluate the expression ( ) .
2
Part B. Compare your strategy with a partner.
Instructional Items
Instructional Item 1
3
( 12 − | 8 − 5 | )
What is the value of the expression ?
36
Instructional Item 2
1 2 1
What is the value of the expression ( 3 − 4 ) + | 7 − | ?
2 6
Instructional Item 3
Evaluate the expression 18 − 3 ( 4 . 12 + 7 . 6 ÷ 2 ) .
*The strategies, tasks and items included in the B1G - M are examples and should not be considered comprehensive.
MA.7.NSO.2.2
Benchmark
MA.7.NSO.2.2 Add, subtract, multiply and divide rational numbers with procedural fluency.
23 | P a g e

===== B1G-M-Grd7-TI · page 24 =====
Connecting Benchmarks/Horizontal Alignment Terms from the K - 12 Glossary
• MA.7.AR.1.1 • R ational N umber
• MA.7.AR.2.2
• MA.7.AR.3
• MA.7.AR.4.5
• MA.7.GR.1
• MA.7.GR.2
• MA.7.DP. 1.1, MA.7.DP.1.2,
MA.7.DP.1.3
Vertical Alignment
Previous Benchmarks Next Benchmarks
• MA.6.NSO.2.1 , MA.6.NSO.2.2 • MA.8.NSO.1.5 , MA.8.NSO.1.7
• MA.6.NSO.4.1 , MA.6.NSO.4.2
Purpose and Instructional Strategies
In grade 6, students performed operations with integers, multiplied and divided positive multi -
digit numbers with decimals to the thousandths and computed products and quotients of positive
fractions by positive fractions, including mixed numbers with proc edural fluency. In grade 7,
students perform all four operations with positive and negative rational numbers with procedural
fluency . In grade 8, they will expand to operations with rational numbers including exponents
and radicals , and will perform operations with rational numbers expressed in scientific notation.
• This benchmark is the completion of arithmetic operations with rational numbers
( MTR.3.1 ).
• Instruction includes the possibility that the division of two fractions can be written as a
complex fraction. This connection will be important when students work with algebraic
expressions in later grades.
• Students should develop fluency with and without the use of a calculator when
performing opera tions with rational numbers.
Common Misconceptions or Errors
• Students may think the product of a fraction and another fraction is greater than either
factor. Use manipulatives or models referenced in previous grade levels to support
conceptual understanding (MTR.2.1) .
1
• Students may incorrectly believe that dividing by is the same as dividing by 2.
2
• Students may incorrectly solve complex fractions by multiplying the two fractions.
Strategies to Support Tiered Instruction
• Instruction includes the use of fraction tiles to represent operations with positive fractions
while simultaneously recording the equivalent numerical expressions.
• Instruction includes the use of base ten blocks to represent operations with positive
decim als while simultaneously recording the equivalent numerical expressions.
• Instruction includes the use of two - color counters to represent operations with positive
and negative whole numbers while simultaneously recording the equivalent numerical
expression s.
24 | P a g e

===== B1G-M-Grd7-TI · page 25 =====
• Teacher co - creates a graphic organizer with students to review operations with positive
fractions and operations with integers to assist when applying operations with rational
numbers.
• Instruction includes using manipulatives or models referenced in pr evious grade levels to
support conceptual understanding.
Instructional Tasks
Instructional Task 1 (MTR.7.1)
1
Daliah purchases eggs by the dozen for her two children. Each day, Zane eats carton and
4
1
Amare eats carton. A carton of 12 eggs costs $1.65.
6
Part A. How much does Daliah spend on eggs for her two children in 30 days?
Part B. During one of her shopping trips, Daliah finds that her grocery store has started to
sell cartons of 18 eggs for $2.25. If she begins to purchase these cartons, how
much does Daliah spend on eggs fo r her two children in 30 days? After how many
days will Da liah spend more than $50? Explain your reasoning.
Instructional Task 2 (MTR.3.1)
3 2
Given 𝑎 = − 2 and 𝑏 = , calculate the following:
5 3
• 𝑎 + 𝑏
• 𝑎 − 𝑏
• 𝑎 ∙ 𝑏
𝑎
•
𝑏
Instructional Items
Instructional Item 1
15
Determine the product of and − 1 . 2 .
6
Instructional Item 2
What is the value of the expression 7 . 24 − 5 . 01 − 78 . 4 ?
Instructional Item 3
24
−
5
What is the value of the expression 1 ?
9
*The strategies, tasks and items included in the B1G - M are examples and should not be considered comprehensive.
25 | P a g e

===== B1G-M-Grd7-TI · page 26 =====
MA.7.NSO.2.3
Benchmark
Solve real - world problems involving any of the four operations with rational
MA.7.NSO.2.3
numbers.
Benchmark Clarifications:
Clarification 1: Instruction includes using one or more operations to solve problems.
Connecting Benchmarks/Horizontal Alignment Terms from the K - 12 Glossary
• MA.7.AR.3 • R ational N umber
• MA.7.AR.4.5
• MA.7.GR.2.2 , MA.7.GR.2.3
• MA.7.DP.1.1, MA.7.DP.1.2,
MA.7.DP.1.3
Vertical Alignment
Previous Benchmarks Next Benchmarks
• MA.6.NSO.2.3 • MA.8.NSO.1.6 , MA.8.NSO.1.7
Purpose and Instructional Strategies
Students solve real - world problems involving any of the four operations with positive multi - digit
decimals or positive fractions, including mixed numbers in grade 6, with all rational numbers in
grade 7, and with rational numbers including exponents and radicals in grade 8.
• This benchmark applies the procedural fluency skills of the previous benchm ark to real -
world problems ( MTR.3.1 ).
• Students should develop fluency with and without the use of a calculator when
performing operations with rat ional numbers.
• Instruction includes the use of technology to help emphasize the proper use of grouping
symbols for order of operations.
• With the completion of operations with rational numbers in grade 7, students should have
experience using technology with decimals and fractions as they occur in the real world.
This experience will help to prepare students working with irrational numbers in grade 8.
• Open - ended tasks with real - world contexts ( MTR.7.1 ) will allow students to practice
multiple p athways for solutions as well as to make comparisons with their peers
( MTR.4.1 ) to refine their problem - solving methods.
• Instruction includes support in vocabulary development as related to the context of the
real - world problems when necessary.
Common Misconceptions or Errors
• Students may incorrectly perform operations with the numbers in the problem based on
what has recently been taught, rather than what is most appropriate for a solution. To
overcome this misconception, have students estimate or predict solutions prior to so lving
and then compare those predictions to their actual solution to see if it is reasonable
(MTR.6.1) .
• Students may incorrectly oversimplify a problem by circling the numbers, underlining the
question, boxing in key words, and eliminat ing context informat ion that is needed for the
solution . This process can cause students to not be able to comprehend the context or the
26 | P a g e

===== B1G-M-Grd7-TI · page 27 =====
situation ( MTR.2.1 , MTR.4.1 , MTR.5.1 , MTR.7.1 ).
Strategies to Support Tiered Instruction
• Instruction includes the use of visual representations and manipulatives to represent the
given situation and use the chosen representation to help find the solution.
• The teacher provides opportunities for students to comprehend the context or situation by
engaging in questions like the ones be low .
o What do you know from the problem?
o What is the problem asking you to find?
o Can you create a visual model to help you understand or see patterns in your
problem?
• Teacher co - creates a graphic organizer with students to review operations with positiv e
fractions and operations with integers to assist when applying operations with rational
numbers.
• Instruction includes the use of a three - read strategy. Students read the problem three
different times, each with a different purpose. Laminating these quest ions on a printed
card for students to utilize as a resource in and out of the classroom would be helpful.
o First, read the problem with the purpose of answering the question: What is the
problem, context, or story about?
o Second, read the problem with the p urpose of answering the question: What are
we trying to find out?
o Third, read the problem with the purpose of answering the question: What
information is important in the problem?
• Instruction includes having students estimate or predict solutions prior to solving and
then compare those predictions to their actual solution to see if it is reasonable.
Instructional Tasks
Instructional Task 1 (MTR.7.1)
All of the 7 th grade homeroom classes collected recycling, with the top three classes splitting
the grand prize of $800 toward building their own gardens. Mr. Brogle’s class turned in 237
pounds of recycling, Mrs. Abiola’s class turned in 192 pounds and Mr. Wheeler’s cl ass
turned in 179 pounds. How should these top three divide the money so that each class gets
the same fraction of the prize money as the fraction of recycling they collected?
Instructional Task 2 (MTR.7.1)
Kari and Natalia went to the Fun Warehouse with $20 each to spend. There is a $3 entry fee
each and the menu of activities is shown below. What are some possible combinations of
activities Kari and Natalia can enjoy before they each run out of money?
Go - Karts $9.75
Laser Tag $7.50
Inflatables $5.00
Mini - Bowling $2.25
Video Games $0.75
Instructional Task 3 (MTR.4.1, MTR.7.1)
27 | P a g e

===== B1G-M-Grd7-TI · page 28 =====
Anjeanette is making cupcakes for her sister’s birthday. Among other ingredients, her recipe
1 3
calls for 2 cups of flour, cup of butter and cup sugar in one batch. In the kitchen, she has 8
2 4
cups of flour, 2 cups of butter and 2 cups of sugar.
Part A. How many batches of cupcakes can Anjeanette make?
Part B. What should Anjeanette ask for if she wants to borrow from her neighbor to make
one more batch?
Instructional Items
Instructional Item 1
Kari and Natalia went to the Fun Warehouse with $20 each to spend. They paid the $3 entry
fee each and then decided they would both play laser tag and mini - bowling. If they finished
the day with playing 4 video games each, how much money will be left?
Go - Karts $9.75
Laser Tag $7.50
Inflatables $5.00
Mini - Bowling $2.25
Video Games $0.75
*The strategies, tasks and items included in the B1G - M are examples and should not be considered comprehensive.
28 | P a g e

===== B1G-M-Grd7-TI · page 29 =====
Algebraic Reasoning
MA.7. AR .1 Rewrite algebraic expressions in equivalent forms .
MA.7.AR.1.1
Benchmark
Apply properties of operations to add and subtract linear expressions with
MA.7.AR.1.1
rational coefficients.
1 15
( )
Example: 7 𝑥 − 4 − ( 2 − 𝑥 ) is equivalent to 𝑥 − 6 .
2 2
Benchmark Clarifications:
Clarification 1: Instruction includes linear expressions in the form 𝑎𝑥 ± 𝑏 or 𝑏 ± 𝑎𝑥 , where 𝑎 and 𝑏 are
rational numbers.
Clarification 2: Refer to Properties of Operations, Equality and Inequality (Appendix D) .
Connecting Benchmarks/Horizontal Alignment Terms from the K - 12 Glossary
• MA.7.NSO.2.2 , MA.7.NSO.2.3 • C oefficient
• L inear E xpression
• R ational N umber
Vertical Alignment
Previous Benchmarks Next Benchmarks
• MA.6.AR.1.4 • MA.8.AR.1.2 , MA.8.AR.1.3
Purpose and Instructional Strategies
In grade 6, students generated equivalent algebraic expressions with integer coefficients . In grade
7, students perform operations (adding and subtracting) on linear expressions with rational
coefficients. In grade 8, students will multiply two linear expressions with rational coefficients as
well as continuing to write equivalent expressions.
• Students extend understanding of operations with rational numbers to linear expressions.
This will be critical to solving equations and inequalities having more than one step. This
is also an opportunity to build fluency within MA.7.NSO.2 ( MTR.3.1 ).
• Use manipulatives such as algebra t iles to emphasize the difference between linear and
constant terms for integers. Once clear and confident, transition from manipulatives to the
abstract to include rational numbers ( MTR.2.1 ).
o Algebra T iles
• Variables are not limited to 𝑥 . I nstruction includes using various lowercase letters for
their variables ; however 𝑜 , 𝑖 and 𝑙 should be avoided as they too closely resemble zero
and one.
• Instruction includes students working within the same type of rati onal numbers when
appropriate.
29 | P a g e

===== B1G-M-Grd7-TI · page 30 =====
o For example, if students are given fractions, the solution should be demonstrated
in fractions and not be converted to decimals.
Common Misconceptions or Errors
• Students may incorrectly add and subtract terms that are unlike. To address this
misconception, begin with a sorting activity to organize terms into groups before performing
operations with those terms (MTR.2.1) . Have students verbalize the criteria for be ing
considered like terms to ensure they are focused on the correct similarities.
• Students may incorrectly distribute the negative sign when subtracting a linear expression
with more than one term.
o For example, 3 − ( 2 𝑥 + 7 ) may be incorrectly rewritten as 3 − 2 𝑥 + 7 . To address
this misconception, use algebra tiles or other manipulatives to physically show the
removal or subtraction of an expression.
Strategies to Support Tiered Instruction
• Teacher provides instruction to students that may incorrectly add and subtract unlike
terms by giving students examples of like and unlike expressions and having students
decide if they are equivalent. Give students the opportunity to explain why the
expre ssions are equivalent or not equivalent.
• Teacher provides instruction on using the properties of operations to group like terms
together.
• Instruction includes the use of different color highlighters or shapes to identify algebraic
terms and constants and then combining like terms identified with the same color.
2
o For example, the expression 3 𝑥 + 5 + 𝑥 − 6 can be color coded as 3 𝑥 + 5 +
3
2 2 2
𝑥 − 6 to determine that 3 𝑥 + 𝑥 + 5 − 6 = 3 𝑥 − 1 .
3 3 3
• Teacher includes a leading coefficient of 1 in front of grouping symbols to help students
recognize the implications of a negative sign in front of grouping symbols.
1 7 1 7 1
o For example, − ( 2 𝑥 + ) could be written as + ( − 1 ) ( 2 𝑥 + ) or as +
3 3 3 3 3
7
( )
− 1 ⋅ ( 2 𝑥 + ) to help remind students to distribute the negative one before
3
performing the next operation.
• Teacher provides students with a visual picture to decide if expressions are equivalent.
o For example, if 𝑠 represents the number of blue squares and 𝑡 represents the
num ber of red triangles shown , students can write an expression to represent the
display. Students could write the expression as 𝑠 + 𝑠 + 𝑠 + 𝑡 + 𝑡 , and then
rewrite with combining like terms as 3 𝑠 + 2 𝑡 .
• Instruction includes building a foundation for the properties of operations by modeling
the associative, commutative, and distributives properties with algebra tiles for numeric
and algebraic expressions and allowing the students to manipulate the algebra tiles as
well.
• Instruction includes providing students with two different linear expressions already
represented with algebra tiles and then allowing the students to add and subtract the
algebra tiles to determine their sum or difference.
30 | P a g e

===== B1G-M-Grd7-TI · page 31 =====
• Teacher co - create s a graphic organizer with students to review operations with positive
fractions and operations with integers to assist when applying operations with rational
numbers.
• Teacher provides a sorting activity to organize terms into groups before performing
oper ations with those terms. Have students verbalize the criteria for being considered like
terms to ensure they are focused on the correct similarities.
• Instruction includes using algebra tiles or other manipulatives to physically show the
removal or subtrac tion of an expression.
Instructional Tasks
Instructional Task 1 (MTR.4.1)
3
Part A. Write three expressions that are equivalent to 𝑥 − 1 .
4
Part B. Compare the expressions from Part A with a partner.
• How many are the same?
• How many are different?
• How many are correct?
• If there are incorrect expressions, what were the errors? Explain your
reasoning.
Instructional Items
Instructional Item 1
Write the following expression using the fewest possible terms.
( 5 𝑥 − 1 ) − ( 0 . 06 𝑥 − 4 + 0 . 4 𝑥 )
Instructional Item 2
Write the following expression using the fewest possible terms.
2 1
( 4 + 𝑥 ) + ( 𝑥 − 3 )
3 6
Instructional Item 3
Write the following expression using the fewest possible terms.
4
( 2 𝑥 − − 3 𝑥 ) − ( − 8 𝑥 + 2 )
5
*The strategies, tasks and items included in the B1G - M are examples and shoul d not be considered comprehensive.
31 | P a g e

===== B1G-M-Grd7-TI · page 32 =====
MA.7.AR.1.2
Benchmark
MA.7.AR.1.2 Determine whether two linear expressions are equivalent.
4 5
Example: Are the expressions ( 6 − 𝑥 ) − 3 𝑥 and 8 − 𝑥 equivalent?
3 3
Benchmark Clarifications:
Clarification 1: Instruction includes using properties of operations accurately and efficiently.
Clarification 2: Instruction includes linear expressions in any form with rational coefficients.
Clarification 3: Refer to Properties of Operations, Equality and Inequality (Appendix D) .
Connecting Benchmarks/Horizontal Alignment Terms from the K - 12 Glossary
• MA.7.NSO. 1.2 • L inear E xpression
• MA.7. NSO.2.1
Vertical Alignment
Previous Benchmarks Next Benchmarks
• MA.6.AR.1.4 • MA.8.AR.1.1 , MA.8.AR.1.3
Purpose and Instructional Strategies
In grade 6, students generated equivalent algebraic expressions with integer coefficients. In grade
7, students add and subtract linear expressions with rational coefficients as well as determine
whether two linear expressions are equivalent. In grade 8, s tudents will generate equivalent
expressions including the use of integer exponents as well as rewrite the sum of two algebraic
expressions having a common monomial factor as a common factor multiplied by the sum of two
algebraic expressions.
• Emphasize properties of o perations to determine equivalence. Use manipulatives such as
algebra tiles to emphasize the difference between linear and constant terms.
o Algebra tiles can also be used to model operations concretely and the area model
can be used to represent the distri butive property of multiplication over addition
before moving to the abstract ( MTR.2.1 ).
o Area Model 4 ( 2 𝑥 + 3 ) = 2 ( 4 𝑥 + 6 )
From these representations, students can showcase equivalency between the two
different linear expressions.
• Instruction includes students working within the same type of rational numbers when
appropriate.
o For example, if students are given fractions, the solution should be demonstrated
in fractions and not be converted to decimals.
32 | P a g e

===== B1G-M-Grd7-TI · page 33 =====
• Multiple equivalent expressions should be given, not just the most simplified.
Transforming one or both expressions may be needed to show equivalence ( MTR.3.1 ).
1 1 3 1 1 1 1
o For example, 𝑥 is equivalent to 𝑥 + 𝑥 as well as 𝑥 + 𝑥 + 𝑥 + 𝑥 .
2 5 10 10 10 10 5
Common Misconceptions or Errors
• Students may incorrectly add and subtract terms that are unlike. To address this
misconception, begin with a sorting activity to organize terms into groups before
performing operations with those terms (MTR.2.1) . Have students verbalize the criteria
for being considered like terms to ensure they are focused on the corre ct similarities.
• Students may incorrectly distribute the negative sign when subtracting a linear expression
with more than one term.
1 7 1 7
o For example, − ( 2 𝑥 + ) may be incorrectly rewritten as − 2 𝑥 + and
3 3 3 3
8
concludes that it is equivalent to − 2 𝑥 .
3
Strategies to Support Tiered Instruction
• Teacher provides instruction to students that may incorrectly add and subtract unlike
terms by giving students examples of like and unlike expressions and having students
decide if they are equivalent. Give students the opportunity to explain why the
expre ssions are equivalent or not equivalent .
• Teacher includes a leading coefficient of 1 in front of grouping symbols to help students
recognize the implications of a negative sign in front of grouping symbols.
1 7 1 7 1
o For example, − ( 2 𝑥 + ) could be written as + ( − 1 ) ( 2 𝑥 + ) or as +
3 3 3 3 3
7
( − 1 ) ⋅ ( 2 𝑥 + ) to help remind students to distribute the negative one before
3
performing the next operation.
• Teacher provides instruction on using the properties of operations to group like terms
together.
• Instruction includes the use of different color highlighters or shapes to identify algebraic
terms and constants and then combining like terms identified with the same color.
2
o For example, the expression 3 𝑥 + 5 + 𝑥 − 6 can be color coded as 3 𝑥 + 5 +
3
2 2 2
𝑥 − 6 to determine that 3 𝑥 + 𝑥 + 5 − 6 = 3 𝑥 − 1 .
3 3 3
• Teacher provides students with examples of linear expressions to explain whether two or
more of the expression s are equivalent or not. Teacher co - create s examples of equivalent
and non - equivalent linear expressions with students.
• Teacher co - creates a graphic organizer with students to review operations with rational
numbers.
• Instruction includes providing students wit h two different linear expressions already
represented with algebra tiles and then allowing the students to manipulate the algebra
tiles to determine if they are equivalent. Students should be allowed to justify their
reasoning for why the expressions are equivalent, or not.
• Teacher provides a sorting activity to organize terms into groups before performing
operations with those terms. Have students verbalize the criteria for being considered like
terms to ensure they are focused on the correct similarities .
Instructional Tasks
Instructional Task 1 (MTR.4.1)
33 | P a g e

===== B1G-M-Grd7-TI · page 34 =====
4 2
Part A. Write three expressions that are equivalent to ( 6 − 𝑥 ) + 3 ( 𝑥 + 1 ) .
3 3
Part B. Compare those expressions with a partner. Think about the following questions to
guide your conversation:
• How many are the same?
• How many are different?
• How many are correct?
• If there are incorrect expressions, what were the errors?
Instructional Items
Instructional Item 1
Match the following equivalent expressions.
1 9 1 3 7 9 3
3 𝑥 − 1 3 𝑥 − 6 3 𝑥 − 1 2 𝑥 − 4
8 10 8 10 8 10 4
1 1 3 1
( 3 𝑥 − 4 ) − ( 𝑥 + 2 )
2 10 8 5
1 1 3 1
( 3 𝑥 − 4 ) + ( 𝑥 + 2 )
2 10 8 5
1 3 1 2 1
2 ( 1 𝑥 − 1 ) + ( 1 + 𝑥 )
2 10 2 5 4
1 3 2 1
2 ( 1 𝑥 − 1 ) − ( 1 + 𝑥 )
2 10 5 4
*The strategies, tasks and items included in the B1G - M are examples and should not be considered comprehensive.
34 | P a g e

===== B1G-M-Grd7-TI · page 35 =====
MA.7. AR . 2 Write and solve equations and inequalities in one variable .
MA.7.AR.2.1
Benchmark
Write and solve one - step inequalities in one variable within a mathematical
MA.7.AR.2.1
context and represent solutions algebraically or graphically.
Benchmark Clarifications:
Clarification 1: Instruction focuses on the properties of inequality. Refer to Properties of Operations,
Equality and Inequality (Appendix D) .
𝑥
Clarification 2: Instruction includes inequalities in the forms 𝑝𝑥 > 𝑞 ; > 𝑞 ; 𝑥 ± 𝑝 > 𝑞 and 𝑝 ± 𝑥 > 𝑞 ,
𝑝
where 𝑝 and 𝑞 are specific rational numbers and any inequality symbol can be represented.
Clarification 3: Problems include inequalities where the variable may be on either side of the inequality
symbol.
Connecting Benchmarks/Horizontal Alignment Terms from the K - 12 Glossary
• MA.7.NSO.2
Vertical Alignment
Previous Benchmarks Next Benchmarks
• MA.6.AR.1.2 • MA.8.AR.2.2
• MA.6.AR.2.1 • MA.8.G R .1.3
Purpose and Instructional Strategies
Students are building on their ability to write and verify solutions in inequalities in g rade 6 to
now write and solve one - step inequalities in one variable ( MTR.5.1 ). In grade 8, students will
solve two - step linear inequalities in one variable.
• I nstruction includes real - world scenarios to assist students with making sense of solving
inequalities by checking the reasonableness of their answer.
• Instruction emphasizes p roperties of inequality with connections to the properties of
equality ( MTR.5.1 ) .
• Instruction includ es showing why the inequality symbol reverses when multiplying or
dividing both sides of an inequality by a negative number .
o For example, if the inequality 6 > − 7 is multiplied by − 3 , it results in − 18 > 21
which is a false statement. The inequality symbol must be reversed in order to
keep a true statement. Since 6 is to the right of - 7 on the number line and
multiplying by a negative number reverses directions, 6 ( − 3 ) will be to the left of
− 7 ( − 3 ) on the num ber line.
• Instruction includes cases where the variable is on the left side or the right side of the
inequality.
• Variables are not limited to 𝑥 . I nstruction includes using a variety of lowercase letters for
their variables ; however 𝑜 , 𝑖 and 𝑙 should be avoided as they too closely resemble zero
and one.
• Instruction emphasize s the understanding of defining an algebraic inequality. Students
should have practice with inequalities in the form of 𝑥 > 𝑎 , 𝑥 < 𝑎 , 𝑥 ≥ 𝑎 and 𝑥 ≤ 𝑎 .
Students should explore how “ is greater than or equal to ” and “ is strictly greater than ” are
similar and different as well as “is less than or equal to” and “is strictly less than.”
35 | P a g e

===== B1G-M-Grd7-TI · page 36 =====
Students should use academic language when describing the algebraic inequality.
Common Misconceptions or Errors
• Students may confuse when to use an open versus closed circle when graphing an
inequality. Emphasize the inclusion ( ≤ and ≥ ) versus non - inclusion ( < and > ) of that
value as a viable solution and provide problems that motivate reasoning with different
ranges of possible values for the variable.
• Some students are unable to see the difference between the division property of equality
and the division property o f inequality.
• Students may mis takenly think that the direction the inequality symbol is pointing is
always the direction they shade on the number line. To address this misconception,
emphasize reading the inequality sentence aloud and use numerical example s to test for
viable solutions (MTR.6.1) .
Strategies to Support Tiered Instruction
• Teacher provides instruction on when to use an open versus closed circle when graphing
an inequality. Teacher encourages students to substitute their solution into their graphs
and discuss whether their graph makes sense with the solution.
• Teacher provides a graphic organizer with examples and non - examples of the Division
Property of Equality and the Division Property of Inequality.
• Teacher provides students with pre - drawn number lines for students to number as needed
to graph solutions.
• Teacher provides students with instruction for similarities and diff erences of solving
equations versus solving inequalities.
• Teacher emphasizes re ading the inequality sentence aloud and use numerical examples to
test for solutions.
• Instruction includes emphasizing the inclusion ( ≤ and ≥ ) versus non - inclusion ( < and > )
of that value as a solution and provide problems that motivate reasoning with dif ferent
ranges of possible values for the variable.
o For example, if the given inequality is 𝑥 + 3 > 5 , students can test various
numbers to determine if they are solutions. When students test 𝑥 = 2 , students
should realize that they get the inequality 5 > 5 whic h is not a true statement,
therefore 2 is not a solution.
36 | P a g e

===== B1G-M-Grd7-TI · page 37 =====
Instructional Tasks
Instructional Task 1 (MTR.3.1, MTR.4.1)
Determine if there is an error in each of the following. If there is an error, write the corrected
solution. If there is not an error, indicate “No Error” next to the answer.
C . All the pencils in classroom with an
A . 3 boxes hold at least 120 cookies
total. additional pack of 8 pencils is not enough
3 𝑏 ≥ 120 for a class of 25 students.
𝑏 ≤ 40 𝑝 + 8 < 25
𝑝 < 17
B . 2 . 55 < 4 . 2 − 𝑥
𝑥 < − 1 . 65
Instructional Task 2 (MTR.5.1, MTR.6.1)
Using integers between − 5 and 5 no more than once, finish writing the inequality below,
1
whose solutions are 𝑥 ≥ .
2
𝑥 ≤
Instructional Items
Instructional Item 1
Solve the inequality and graph its solution s on a number line.
𝑎
12 <
4
Instructional Item 2
What are the solutions to the inequality 4 . 2 + 𝑧 ≤ − 5 . 3 ?
Instructional Item 1
Represent the solutions to the inequality − 0 . 125 𝑐 > 0 . 375 on a number line.
*The strategies, tasks and items included in the B1G - M are examples and should not be considered comprehensive.
MA.7.AR.2.2
Benchmark
Write and solve two - step equations in one variable within a mathematical or
MA.7.AR.2.2
real - world context, where all terms are rational numbers.
Benchmark Clarifications:
Clarification 1: Instruction focuses the application of the properties of equality. Refer to Properties of
Operations, Equality and Inequality (Appendix D) .
Clarification 2: Instruction includes equations in the forms 𝑝𝑥 ± 𝑞 = 𝑟 and 𝑝 ( 𝑥 ± 𝑞 ) = 𝑟 , where 𝑝 , 𝑞 and
𝑟 are specific rational numbers.
Clarification 3: Problems include linear equations where the variable may be on either side of the equal
sign.
Connecting Benchmarks/Horizontal Alignment Terms from the K - 12 Glossary
• MA.7.NSO.2 • E quation
• MA.7.AR.3 • R ational N umber
37 | P a g e

===== B1G-M-Grd7-TI · page 38 =====
• MA.7.AR.4.5
• MA.7.GR.2.2 , MA.7.GR.2.3
Vertical Alignment
Previous Benchmarks Next Benchmarks
• MA.6.AR.2.2 , MA.6.AR.2.3 • MA.8.AR.2.1 , MA.8.AR.2.3
Purpose and Instructional Strategies
Students are building on their ability to write and solve one - step equations in g rade 6 with an
emphasis on operations with linear expressions being critical as students then write and solve
two - step equations in grade 7 and multi - step linear equations in grade 8 ( MTR.5.1 ).
• Instruction includes real - world contexts as well as linear equations where the variable
may be on either side of the equal sign ( MTR.7.1 ) .
• Instruction includes stude nts verbalizing or writing the Properties of Operations and
Properties of Equality (see Appendix D) used at each step to their solution.
• Use models or manipulatives, such as algebra tiles, bar diagrams or balances, to
conceptualize equations ( MTR.2.1 ).
o A lgebra T iles
o B ar D iagrams
2 𝑥 − 10 = − 26
o B alances
3 𝑥 + 4 = − 11
• Avoid a particular order when solving and allow students to proceed in multiple ways
that are mathematically accurate.
o For example, in the equation 4 ( 𝑥 + 7 ) = 12 , students may choose to divide both
sides of the equation by 4 or use the Distributive Property with the 4. Compare
the various strategies and ask students to determine which will be most efficient
given different problem stems ( MTR.3.1 ).
Common Miscon ceptions or Errors
• Some students may incorrectly use the addition and subtraction properties of equality on
the same side of the equal sign while solving an equation. To address this misconception,
38 | P a g e

===== B1G-M-Grd7-TI · page 39 =====
use manipulatives such as balances, algebra tiles or bar diagrams to show the balance
between the two sides of an equation (MTR.2.1) .
• Students may incorrectly identify the constants and the coefficients within a real - world
context of the problem.
Strategies to Support Tiered Instruction
• Teacher provides opportunities for students to practice solving equations using the
addition and subtraction properties of equality using an interactive computer equation
balance, manipulatives and other visual representations .
• Teacher provides support for students in identifying the coefficients and constants within
a real - world context of the problem. Present students with examples of real - world
problems that can be solved with equations .
o For example, Cameron’s fish tank can hold 12 gallons of water and h e adds 2 .5
gallons of water a minute. If there are already 3 .4 gallons of water in the tank, for
how many minutes can Cameron fill his tank without overflowing?
• Teacher provides opportunities for students to comprehend the context or situation by
engaging in questions (laminating these questions on a printed card for students to utilize
as a resource in and out of the classroom would be helpful).
o What do you know from the problem?
o What is the problem asking you to find?
o Can you create a visual model to he lp you understand or see patterns in your
problem?
• Teacher provides opportunities for students to use algebra tiles to co - solve provided
equations with the teacher without the need of writing the equation first.
• Teacher provides opportunities for students to co - write an algebraic equation with the
teacher without requiring students to solve the equation .
• Instruction includes the use of a three - read strategy. Students read the problem three
different times, each with a different purpose (l aminating these questions on a printed
card for students to utilize as a resource in and out of the classroom would be helpful).
o First, read the problem with the purpose of answering the question: What is the
problem, context, or story about?
o Second, read the proble m with the purpose of answering the question: What are
we trying to find out?
o Third, read the problem with the purpose of answering the question: What
information is important in the problem?
• Teacher models the use manipulatives such as balances, algebra t iles or bar diagrams to
show the balance between the two sides of an equation.
Instructional Tasks
Instructional Task 1 (MTR.1.1, MTR.7.1)
A plumber has been called in to replace a broken kitchen sink. The material needed costs
$341.25 and the total expected cost of the job is $424.09. How many hours will the plumber
need to work in order to get the job completed?
Part A. What questions would need to be answ ered to approach this problem? Is there
enough informati on given to solve the problem? Wh y or why not?
39 | P a g e

===== B1G-M-Grd7-TI · page 40 =====
Part B. The average rate for a plumber in Florida is $20.71 per hour. Write and solve an
equation to determine how many hours the plumber will be working.
Instructional Task 2 (MTR.5.1)
The length of the rectangle is twice its width. The perimeter of the rectangle totals 45 feet.
What is the width of the rectangle?
Instructional Items
Instructional Item 1
7 2
What is the exact value of 𝑥 in the equation = 𝑥 − 7 ?
9 3
Instructional Item 2
What is the value of 𝑧 in the equation 5 . 6 ( 3 𝑧 − 2 ) = 11 ?
*The strategies, tasks and items included in the B1G - M are examples and should not be considered comprehensive.
40 | P a g e

===== B1G-M-Grd7-TI · page 41 =====
MA.7. AR . 3 Use percentages and proportional reasoning to solve problems .
MA.7.AR.3.1
Benchmark
Apply previous understanding of percentages and ratios to solve multi - step
MA.7.AR.3.1
real - world percent problems.
Example: 23% of the junior population are taking an art class this year. What is the ratio of
juniors taking an art class to juniors not taking an art class?
Example: The ratio of boys to girls in a class is 3 : 2 . What percentage of the students are boys in
the cla ss?
Benchmark Clarifications:
Clarification 1: Instruction includes discounts, markups, simple interest, tax, tips, fees, percent increase,
percent decrease and percent error.
Connecting Benchmarks/Horizontal Alignment Terms from the K - 12 Glossary
• MA.7. NSO. 1.2 • P ercent of C hange
• MA.7.NSO.2 • P ercent E rror
• MA.7.AR.4.4, MA. 7.AR . 4 .5 • R ate
• MA.7.DP.1. 3, MA.7.DP. 1.4 , • S imple I nterest
MA.7.DP.1.5
• MA.7.DP.2.2 , MA.7.DP.2.3 ,
MA.7.DP.2.4
Vertical Alignment
Previous Benchmarks Next Benchmarks
• MA.6.AR.3. 2 , MA.6.AR.3. 4 • MA.8.AR.2.1
Purpose and Instructional Strategies
In grade 6, students solved mathematical and real - world problems involving percentages, ratios,
rates and unit rates. Students then solve multi - step real - world percent problems in grade 7 and
solve multi - step linear equations of any context in grade 8.
• Instruction includes discounts, markups, simple interest, tax, tips, fees, percent increase,
percent decrease and percent error ( MTR.7.1 ).
o Markdown/discount is a percentage taken off of an original price. Instruction
includes showing the connection between subtracting the calculated discount or
taking the difference between 100% and the discount and multiplying that by the
original price.
▪ Fo r example, if there was a 15% discount on an item that costs $15.99,
students could take 85% of $15.99 or take 15% of $15.99 and subtract that
value from the original price of $15.99.
o Markup showcases adding a charge to the initial price. Markups are ofte n shown
in retail situations.
o Simple interest refers to money you can earn by initially investing some money
(the pri ncipal). The percentage of the principal (interest) is added to the principal
making your initial investment grow. The formula, 𝐼 = 𝑃𝑟𝑡 , represents 𝐼 = interest,
𝑃 = principal, 𝑟 = rate, and 𝑡 =time. When using simple interest, provide the formula
as students should not be expected to memorize this.
41 | P a g e

===== B1G-M-Grd7-TI · page 42 =====
o Tax, tips and fees are an additional char ge added to the initial price. Students can
add the calculated tax , tip or fee to the original price or add 1 to the tax, tip or fee
to reach the final cost.
▪ For example, if there was a 6% sales tax on clothing and a t - shirt costs
$7.99. Students can a dd 100% to the 6% and multiply that value to $7.99
or students can find 6% of the $7.99 and add that to the original value of
the t - shirt.
o Percent Increase/Percent Decrease asks students to look for a percenta ge instead
of a dollar amount. Students should d iscover that they can use the formula below
to help become more flexible in their thinking.
𝑛𝑒𝑤 𝑝𝑟𝑖𝑐𝑒 − 𝑜𝑟𝑖𝑔𝑖𝑛𝑎𝑙 𝑝𝑟𝑖𝑐𝑒
× 100
𝑜𝑟𝑖𝑔𝑖𝑛𝑎𝑙 𝑝𝑟𝑖𝑐𝑒
o Percent Error is a way to expres s the size of the error (or deviation) between two
mea surements.
| 𝑒𝑠𝑡𝑖𝑚𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛 − 𝑎𝑐𝑡𝑢𝑎𝑙 |
% 𝑒𝑟𝑟𝑜𝑟 = × 100
𝑎𝑐𝑡𝑢𝑎𝑙
• Use bar models to model percent increase and decrease problems.
o For example, if you are finding percent age s that are in multiples of 10%, your bar
model may look like the model bel ow.
To showcase the percent increase, you would add additional boxes into the bar
model. If you are showcasing a percent decrease, then you would cross out boxes
for the decrease ( MTR.2.1 ).
• Use bar models, double number lines, tables or other visual representations to model
relationships between percentages and the part and whole amounts ( MTR.2.1 ).
o D ouble N umber L ine
o T able
Instruction includes the use of patterns when using a table. In the example above,
students can use the idea of 100% being 300 and using this knowledge to find
1
other percent age s. 10 is of 100, so students can divide by 10. To find 20%,
10
students can multiply their solution from 10% by 2. The pattern can continue to
relate common connections between percent age s ( MTR.5.1 ).
• Reinforce how percent age s relate to fractions and decimals. Help students write
equivalent ratios to represent problems using reasoning about the relationships between
the quantities.
o Instruction includes using proportional relationships and multiplicative reasoning
42 | P a g e

===== B1G-M-Grd7-TI · page 43 =====
to solve pro blems.
Common Misconceptions or Errors
• Students may incorrectly place the decimal point when calculating with percent age s . If
students have discovered the shortcut of moving the decimal point twice, instruction
includes understanding of how a percent relates to fractions and decimals. Refer to
MA.7.NSO.1.2 to emphasize equivalent forms.
• Students may forget to change the percent amount into decimal form (divide the percent
by 100) when setting up an equation ( MTR.3.1 ).
• Students may incorrectly believe all percent age s must be between 1 and 100%. To
address this misconception, provide examples of percentages below 1% and over 100%.
• Students may incorrectly believe a percent containing a decimal is already in decimal
form.
o For example, emphasize that 43.5% is 43.5 out of 100 and dividing by 100 will
provide the decimal form.
• In multiple discount problems, students may incorrectly combine the discounts instead of
working them sequentially ( MTR.5.1 ).
o For example, 25% off, then 10 % off could incorrectly lead to 35% off rather than
finding 25% off before calculating the additional 10% off.
• Students may incorrectly invert the part and the whole in the percent problem. To address
this misconception, students should use bar models to help visualize and make sense of
the problem (MTR.2.1) .
Strategies to Support Tiered Instruction
• Instruction includes the use of estimation to find the approximate solution before
calculating the actual result to help with correct placement of the decimal point and
reasonableness of the solution.
• Teacher provides opportunities for students to use a 100 frame to review place value for
and the connections to decimal, fractional, and percentage forms.
• Teacher provides support for students in dividing b y 100 to change percent into decimal
form. Teacher supports by providing calculators, manipulatives and base ten blocks to
multiply decimals.
• Instruction includes having students take different percentages of the same amount, such
as 40% of 80, 4% of 80, 0 .4% of 80, 0.04% of 80 and 400% of 80. Students can be given
the flexibility to provide the answer as decimal or fraction and compare.
• Teacher provides support for students when solving multi - discount problems and
combining the discounts. Instruction might begin with a single step discount problem in a
real - world context.
o For example, teacher can include local sale flyers with products that students are
interested in buying. Have students explain how to apply the multi - discounts with
a comparison of the difference in costs when combining the discounts incorrectly.
• Teacher provides opportunities fo r students to reason and think about multiple discount
problems by providing prompts.
o For example, “if a pair of jeans are 50% off with an additional 50% off, does that
mean the jeans are 100% off, or free?” or “what if the jeans are 75% off with an
additi onal 50% off, does that mean the jeans are 125% off and the store now owes
you money to take them?”
43 | P a g e

===== B1G-M-Grd7-TI · page 44 =====
• Teacher provides opportunities for students to comprehend the context or situation by
engaging in questions ( laminating these questions on a printed card fo r students to utilize
as a resource in and out of the classroom would be helpful).
o What do you know from the problem?
o What is the problem asking you to find?
o Can you create a visual model to help you understand or see patterns in your
problem?
• Teacher pr ovides support when solving multi - discount problems, by providing students
with a table to keep track of the information in the problem.
• Instruction includes the use of a three - read strategy. Students read the problem three
different times, each with a dif ferent purpose ( laminating these questions on a printed
card for students to utilize as a resource in and out of the classroom would be helpful).
o First, read the problem with the purpose of answering the question: What is the
problem, context, or story abo ut?
o Second, read the problem with the purpose of answering the question: What are
we trying to find out?
o Third, read the problem with the purpose of answering the question: What
information is important in the problem?
• Teacher encourages the use of bar mod els to help visualize and make sense of the
problem.
• Instruction includes understanding of how a percent relates to fractions and decimals if
students have discovered the shortcut of moving the decimal point twice. Refer to
MA.7.NSO.1.2 to emphasize equiv alent forms.
Instructional Tasks
Instructional Task 1 (MTR.4.1, MTR.7.1)
SurfPro Shop and The Surfer Store both sold surfboards for $350. In February, SurfPro Shop
wanted to increase their profits so they increased the prices of their boards by 15%. When
this increase failed to bring in more money, they decreased their price again by 10% in
November. To beat their competitor who had increased prices, The Surf er Store decided to
decrease their price of surfboards by 10% in March. However, when they started to lose
money on the new pricing scheme, they increased the price of surfboards in November by
15%.
Part A. If no other changes were made after November, whic h store now has the better
price for surfboards?
Part B. W hat is the difference between their prices?
44 | P a g e

===== B1G-M-Grd7-TI · page 45 =====
Instructional Items
Instructional Item 1
A college’ s intramural soccer team has 30 players, 60% of which are women. After 22 new
players joined the team, the percentage of women was reduced to 50%. How many of the
new players are women?
Instructional Item 2
Miguel takes out a loan that adds interest each year on the initial amount . What is the interest
Miguel will pay on the loan if he borrowed $5,000 at an annual interest rate of 4.5% for 15
years? (Use the formula 𝐼 = 𝑃𝑟𝑡 , where 𝐼 is the interest, 𝑃 is the principal or initial
investment, 𝑟 is the interest rate per year , and 𝑡 is the number of years.)
Instructional Item 3
Massimo lost his mathematics textbook. The school charges a lost book fee of 70% of the
original cost of the book. If Massimo received a notice he owed the school $73.50 for the lost
textbook, what was the original cost?
*The strategies, tasks and items included in the B1G - M are examples and should not be considered comprehensive.
MA.7.AR.3.2
Benchmark
Apply previous understanding of ratios to solve real - world problems involving
MA.7.AR.3.2
proportions.
Example: Scott is mowing lawns to earn money to buy a new gaming system and knows he needs
to mow 35 lawns to earn enough money. If he can mow 4 lawns in 3 hours and 45
minutes, how long will it take him to mow 35 lawns? Assume that he can mow each
lawn in the sam e amount of time.
Example: Ashley normally runs 10 - kilometer races which is about 6.2 miles. She wants to start
training for a half - marathon which is 13.1 miles. How many kilometers will she run in
the half - marathon? How does that compare to her normal 10 K race distance?
Connecting Benchmarks/Horizontal Alignment Terms from the K - 12 Glossary
• MA.7.NSO.2 • Constant of Proportionality
• MA.7.AR.4.4, MA.7.AR.4.5 • Proportional Relationships
• MA.7.GR.1.3
• MA.7.DP.1.3 , MA.7.DP.1.4
Vertical Alignment
Previous Benchmarks Next Benchmarks
• MA.6.AR.3.5 • MA.8.AR.3.1
• MA.8.GR.2.4
Purpose and Instructional Strategies
In grade 6, students solved mathematical and real - world problems involving ratios, rates and unit
rates, including comparisons, mixtures, ratios of lengths and conversions within the same
measurement system. In grade 7, students apply that ratio reasoning to solve real - world problems
involving proportions. In grade 8, students will determine if a linear relationship is also a
45 | P a g e

===== B1G-M-Grd7-TI · page 46 =====
proportional relationship and will solve problems involving proportional relationships between
similar triangles.
• Instruction include s making connections to comparing ratios from grade 6 as a
comparison using the equal sign.
o For example, if a student can complete 7 math problems in 30 minutes and one
wants to determine how many math problems they can complete in 90 minutes,
7 𝑝 7 𝑝
they can co mpare the two ratios and as the equation = to determine the
30 90 30 90
number of math problems.
• Instruction does not emphasize rules, like cross multiplying, when solving proportions.
• Instruction allows time for students to analyze real - world situations. Ratio and rate
reasoning can be applied to many types of real - life problems, including rate and unit rate,
scaling, unit pricing, and statistical analysis ( MTR.7.1 ) .
Common Misconceptions or Errors
• Students may not understand the difference between an additive relationship and a
multiplicative relationship. To help address this misconception, instruction includes the
understanding that proportions are multiplicative relationships.
• Students may incorrectly set up proportions with one of the ratios having incorrect
numbers in the numerator and denominator.
• Students may not recognize simplified forms of ratios in order to find equivalent ratios.
Strategies to Support Tiered Instruction
• Teacher provides instruction focused on the understanding of multiplicative relationships
between two quantities in a proportional relationship.
• Teacher provides instruction on color - coding and labeling the different units when setting
up a proportional relationship to ensure corresponding units are placed in the
corresponding positions within the proportion.
o For example, a student can complete 7 math problems in 30 minutes . How many
math problems can they complete in 90 minutes ?
7 𝑝𝑟𝑜𝑏𝑙𝑒𝑚𝑠 𝑥 𝑝𝑟𝑜𝑏𝑙𝑒𝑚𝑠
=
30 𝑚𝑖𝑛𝑢𝑡𝑒𝑠 90 𝑚𝑖𝑛𝑢𝑡𝑒𝑠
• Teacher co - constructs visual models with students to visualize the multiplicative
relationship between quantities.
o For example, to solve the proportion, the corresponding numbers are tripled to
find a missing value of 21.
• Instruction includes the understanding that proportions are multiplicative relationships.
Instructional Tasks
Instructional Task 1 (MTR.3.1)
46 | P a g e

===== B1G-M-Grd7-TI · page 47 =====
1 2
A recipe that makes 16 cookies calls for cup of sugar and cup of flour. Janelle wants to
4 3
proportionally increase these amounts to get a new recipe using one cup of sugar.
Part A. Using the new recipe, how much flour will she need? Explain or show your work.
Part B. How many cookies can she make with the new recipe? Explain or show your
work.
Instructional Task 2 (MTR.6.1, MTR.7.1)
In buying ground beef for hamburgers, there are several packages from which to choose, as
shown in the table below.
Pounds of Ground Beef 1.5 2 3 3.75
Cost $5.58 $7.44 $11.16 $13.95
If Johannes needs 5 pounds of beef for his barbeque, what will he pay?
Instructional Items
Instructional Item 1
Anthony is writing the place cards for his best friend’s wedding reception. If he can write 12
place cards in 5 minutes, how long will it take him to complete the entire group of 180 place
cards?
*The strategies, tasks and items included in the B1G - M are examples and should not be considered comprehensive.
MA.7.AR.3.3
Benchmark
Solve mathematical and real - world problems involving the conversion of units
MA.7.AR.3.3
across different measurement systems.
Benchmark Clarifications:
Clarification 1: Problem types are limited to length, area, weight, mass, volume and money.
Connecting Benchmarks/Horizontal Alignment Terms from the K - 12 Glossary
• MA.7.NSO.1.2 • A rea
• MA.7.NSO.2 • C apacity
• MA.7.AR.4.4, MA.7.AR.4.5 • C ustomary U nits
• MA.7.GR.1 • M etric U nits
• MA.7.GR.2
Vertical Alignment
Previous Benchmarks Next Benchmarks
• MA.6.AR.3.5 • MA.8.GR.1.2
Purpose and Instructional Strategies
In grade 6, students performed conversions within the same measurement system. In grade 7,
students solve mathematical and real - world problems involving the conversion of units across
different measurement systems. In grade 8, students will apply these con versions when solving
problems involving the distance between two points in a coordinate plane.
47 | P a g e

===== B1G-M-Grd7-TI · page 48 =====
• Focus on using conversion ratios to create equivalent values.
1
o For example, if 1 foot = 12 inches, you can use the ratio of to solve problems.
12
Students may also use conversion ratios in their science courses. Emphasize that
multiplying by equivalent values of 1 does not change the value but gives an equivalent
value in another unit of measurement.
• Instruction includes using manipulatives to estimate conversi on ratios across
measurement systems such as yard sticks, meter sticks, measuring cups and graduated
cylinders ( MTR.2.1 ).
• Students may need review on which units are used to measure length, volume and mass.
• Instruction includes using a reference sheet with conversion ratios.
Common Misconceptions or Errors
• Students may incorrectly place the values in a conversion ratio. To address this
misconception, have students estimate values prior to calculations using the conversion
ratio (MTR.6.1) .
Strategies to Support Tiered Instruction
• Teacher provides opportunities for students to comprehend the context or situation by
engaging in questions ( laminating these questions on a printed card for students to utilize
as a resource in and out of the classroom would be helpful).
o What do you know from the problem?
o What is the problem asking you to find?
o Can you create a visual model to help you understand the problem?
• Teacher provides unit conversion sheet for students to determine the unit of measurement
between different systems.
• Instruction focuses on using a unit conversion table to explicitly describe the process of
converting between different units of measurement.
• Teacher provides instruction on color - coding and labeling the different units when setting
up a proportional relationship to ensure corr esponding units are placed in the
corresponding positions within the proportion.
• Teacher encourages students to use their prior knowledge of proportions to convert unit
of measurement across different measurement systems.
• Teacher provides students a visual of different units of measurements to compare and
estimate the proper conversion ratio.
• Instruction includes the use of a three - read strategy. Students read the problem three
different times, each with a different purpose (l aminating thes e questions on a printed
card for students to utilize as a resource in and out of the classroom would be helpful).
o First, read the problem with the purpose of answering the question: What is the
problem, context, or story about?
o Second, read the problem wi th the purpose of answering the question: What are
we trying to find out?
48 | P a g e

===== B1G-M-Grd7-TI · page 49 =====
o Third, read the problem with the purpose of answering the question: What
information is important in the problem?
• Teacher has students estimate values prior to calculations using the conversion ratio
(MTR.6.1) .
Instructional Tasks
Instructional Task 1 (MTR.1.1, MTR.4.1)
Joe was planning a business trip to Canada, so he went to the bank to exchange $200 U.S.
dollars for Canadian (CDN) dollars. On the way home from the bank, Joe’s boss called to say
that the destination of the trip had changed to Mexico City. Joe went back to the bank to
exchange his Canadian dollars for Mexican pesos. What is the value of Mexican pesos that
Joe has now?
Part A. What questions still need to be answered to approach this problem?
Part B. The rates for CDN to the U . S . dollar and the rate of pesos to the CDN are shown
below.
• Rate of $1.02 CDN per $1 U . S .
• Rate of 2 0.8 pesos per $1 CDN
What is the value of Mexican pesos that Joe has now?
Instructional Items
Instructional Item 1
Jia is buying strings of lights to hang on her patio deck. She needs 80 feet of lights to go
around the entire patio, but the lights she wants to buy are only sold in packs of 5 meters. If
one meter is approximately 3.28 feet, how many packs of lights will Jia need for her patio?
Instructional Item 2
How many milliliters are in 12 fluid ounces?
Instructional Item 3
Convert 50 pounds to kilograms.
Instructional Item 4
When driving from London to Poland, the speed limit signs change from miles per hour
(mph) to kilometers per hour (kph), but your rental car speedometer only reads in mph. If the
speed limit on the highway is 100 kph, at what speed will you exceed the speed limit?
*The strategies, tasks and items included in the B1G - M are examples and should not be considered comprehensive.
MA.7. AR . 4 Analyze and represent two - variable proportional relationships .
MA.7.AR.4.1
Benchmark
Determine whether two quantities have a proportional relationship by
MA.7.AR.4.1
examining a table , graph or written description.
Benchmark Clarifications:
49 | P a g e

===== B1G-M-Grd7-TI · page 50 =====
Clarification 1: Instruction focuses on the connection to ratios and on the constant of proportionality,
which is the ratio between two quantities in a proportional relationship.
Connecting Benchmarks/Horizontal Alignment Terms from the K - 12 Glossary
• MA.7.NSO.2 • C onstant of P roportionality
• MA.7.AR.3.2 • P roportional R elationships
• MA.7.GR.1.3 , MA.7.GR.1.4,
MA.7.GR.1.5
Vertical Alignment
Previous Benchmarks Next Benchmarks
• MA.6.AR.3.3 , MA.6.AR.3.4 , • MA.8.AR.3.1
MA.6.AR.3.5
• MA.8.GR.2.4
Purpose and Instructional Strategies
In grade 6, students solved problems involving ratios, rates and unit rates, including
comparisons, mixtures, ratios of lengths and conversions within the same measurement system.
In grades 7 , students work with proportional relationships between two variables , and in grade 8,
they will work with linear relationships.
• Instruction includes di fferent ways of representing proportional relationships, such as
tables and graphs. Multiplying or dividing one quantity in a ratio by a particular factor
requires doing the same with the other quantity in the ratio to maintain the proportional
relationship. Graphing equivalent ratios create a straight line passing through the origin.
o T ables
𝒙 5 40 65
𝒚 1 8 13
o G raphs
• Instruction allows time for students to analyze real - world situations to determine if
quantities are in proportional relationships ( MTR.7.1 ).
• Instruction includes the connection between ratios and the constant of proportionality
( MA.7.AR.4.2 ) as a method to determine whether a relationship is proportion or not.
Determining the constant of proportionality may be helpful when given a table.
• Instruction builds on students’ knowledge of unit rates and equivalent fractions to
determine this const ant ( MTR.5.1 ) .
• Compare various representations of the same relationship for students to make
comparisons and identify patterns. This should include both proportional and non -
proportional relationships for compare and contrast discussions ( MTR.4.1 ) .
Common Misconceptions or Errors
50 | P a g e

===== B1G-M-Grd7-TI · page 51 =====
• Using cross products as a strategy to test for equivalent ratios may lead to errors and
misconceptions solving more complex equations in the future. To address this
misconception, instruction focuses on testing equivalent r atios using tables or graphs to
ensure students understand that two quantities are proportional to each other when each
quantity in a ratio , multiplied by a constant, gives the corresponding quantity in the
second ratio (MTR.3.1) .
o For example, provide students with the relationship between feet and yards.
Students can discuss how the relationship 6 feet = 2 yards connects to the
relationship 1.5 feet = 0.5 yard.
• Stude nts may incorrectly believe the relationship is not proportional if the origin is not
visible in the graph or given in the table. Help students extend the graph or table, using
the pattern between points, until it reaches the origin.
• Students may incorrect ly believe all graphs that are straight lines represent proportional
relationships . To address this misconception, instruction focuses on the understanding
that proportional relationships have a constant ratio between the two coordinates of each
point and pass through the origin.
• Students reverse the position of the variables when writing equations. Students may find
it useful to use letters for the variables that are specifically related to the quantities.
• Students may neglect to test all values when given a table.
Strategies to Support Tiered Instruction
• Teacher provides students with examples and non - examples of proportional relationships
in a table, a graph and a verbal description. Teacher provides instructions for students to
understand the patterns in proportional and non - proportional relationships.
• Instruction includes determining the value of 𝑦 when the 𝑥 - value is zero to determine if
the table is proportional.
• Instruction includes determining the ratio for each value of 𝑥 and 𝑦 in a table to ensure all
values have the same ratio.
• Teacher reminds students to use their knowledge of unit rates or equivalent fractions to
find the pattern and extend the graph to determine if the graph is proportional.
• Teacher co - constructs a graphi c organizer with examples and non - examples of
proportional relationships in a table, graph and verbal description for students to compare
and identify patterns in proportional and non - proportional relationships.
• Instruction includes the use of geometric so ftware to represent proportional and non -
proportional graphs to visually compare the models and clear the misconception that all
linear graphs represent a proportional relationship.
• Instruction focuses on the understanding that proportional relationships h ave a constant
ratio between the two coordinates of each point and pass through the origin.
• Instruction includes using the pattern between points to extend the graph or table until it
reaches the origin.
• Teacher models how to use letters for the variable s that are specifically related to the
quantities.
o For example, u se 𝑡 for tacos, or 𝑚 for mice.
Instructional Tasks
Instructional Task 1 (MTR.4.1, MTR.7.1)
51 | P a g e

===== B1G-M-Grd7-TI · page 52 =====
Johnny and Eleanor went to their local gas station to collect information about the cost of
fuel for compact cars. They observed both regular and premium gas purchases that day and
recorded their data in the table below.
Gallons Purchased 11.5 7.2 10 14.3 6.8 9.7
Cost $25.23 $15.80 $21.94 $40.63 $14.92 $27.56
Part A. Is there a proportional relationship between the number of gallons of gas sold and
the cost? Explain your answer.
Part B. If the relationship is not proportional, which data value or values should be
changed to make the relationship proportional? What could explain this
difference?
Instructional Items
Instructional Item 1
Angela is training for a marathon and completes her long mileage runs for training on the
weekend. Over the last 3 weekends she ran 15 miles in 2 hours ; 18 miles in 2 hours, 33
minutes ; and 22 miles in 3 hours, 7 minutes. Determine if her weekend training runs
showcase a proportional relationship.
*The strategies, tasks and items included in the B1G - M are examples and should not be considered comprehensive.
52 | P a g e

===== B1G-M-Grd7-TI · page 53 =====
MA.7.AR.4.2
Benchmark
Determine the constant of proportionality within a mathematical or real - world
MA.7.AR.4.2 context given a table, graph or written description of a proportional
relationship.
Example: A graph has a line that goes through the origin and the point ( 5 , 2 ) . This represents a
2
proportional relationship and the constant of proportionality is .
5
Example: Gina works as a babysitter and earns $9 per hour. She can only work 6 hours this week.
Gina wants to know how much money she will make. Gina can use the equation 𝑒 =
9ℎ , where 𝑒 is the amount of money earned, ℎ is the number of hours worked and 9 is
the constant of proportionality.
Connecting Benchmarks/Horizontal Alignment Terms from the K - 12 Glossary
• MA.7.NSO.2 • C onstant of P roportionality
• MA.7.AR.3.2 , MA.7.AR.3.3 • O rigin
• MA.7.GR.1.3 , MA.7.GR.1.5 • P roportional R elationships
Vertical Alignment
Previous Benchmarks Next Benchmarks
• MA. 6 .AR.3.2 • MA.8.AR.3.2
Purpose and Instructional Strategies
In grade 6, students determined rates and unit rates in ratios. In grade 7, students take a broader
view of a rate or unit rate as they understand it to be the constant of proportionality in a
proportional relationship. In grade 8, students will expand the ir understanding of the constant of
proportionality in proportional relationships to slope in linear relationships.
• Instruction includes different ways of representing proportional relationships, such as
tables and graphs. Multiplying or dividing one quantity in a ratio by a particular factor
requires doing the same with the other quantity in the ratio to maintain the proportional
relationship. Graphing equivalent ratios create a straight line passing through the origin.
o T ables
𝒙 5 40 65
𝒚 1 8 13
o G raphs
53 | P a g e

===== B1G-M-Grd7-TI · page 54 =====
• Starting instruction with real - world context rather than mathematical procedure allows
students to reason through the meaning of the constant of proportionality ( MTR.7.1 ).
Connect prior knowledge of unit rates when developing the constant of proportionality.
• Instruction includes a connection to pi ( 𝜋 ) as the constant of proportionality in the
circumference formula within MA.7.GR.1.3.
• Problem types include positive and negative constants of proportionality.
Common Misconceptions or Errors
• Some students reverse the order of the ratio between the two quantities in a proportional
relationship.
• Students may neglect the scale(s) of the axes on a graph. To address this misconception,
have students interpret the constant of proportionality in context and evaluate the
reasonableness of the answer. This m ay prompt students to revisit the graphical
representation for better details.
• Students may incorrectly believe any line represents a proportional relationship. To
address this misconception, revisit the development of the equation 𝑦 = 𝑝𝑥 and be sure
students see all proportional relationships have the origin as a common point.
Strategies to Support Tiered Instruction
• Instruction focuses on students’ comprehension of the context or situation by engaging in
questions ( laminating these questions on a printed card for students to utilize as a
resource in and out of the classroom would be helpful).
o What do you know from the problem?
o What is the problem asking you to find?
o What are the two quantities in this problem?
o How are the quantities related to each other?
• When determining the constant of proportionally in a graph, the teacher can instruct
students to interpret the coordinate point as it relates to the titles of each axis. Teacher
and students can use this information to co - construct a table to clear up the
misconception of misinterpreting the context of the constant proportionalit y.
• Instruction includes the use of a three - read strategy. Students read the problem three
different times, each with a different purpose (l aminating these questions on a printed
card for students to utilize as a resource in and out of the classroom woul d be helpful).
o First, read the problem with the purpose of answering the question: What is the
problem, context, or story about?
o Second, read the problem with the purpose of answering the question: What are
we trying to find out?
o Third, read the problem wi th the purpose of answering the question: What
information is important in the problem?
• Teacher has students interpret the constant of proportionality in context and evaluate the
reasonableness of the answer. This may prompt students to revisit the graphic al
representation for better details.
• Teacher revisits the development of the equation 𝑦 = 𝑝𝑥 and be sure students see all
proportional relationships have the origin as a common point.
Instructional Tasks
Instructional Task 1 (MTR.5.1, MTR.7.1)
54 | P a g e

===== B1G-M-Grd7-TI · page 55 =====
Part A. The daily fee for docking a boat at a marina in Port Canaveral is proportional to the
length of the boat. The table displays the fee for four different boat lengths. Find the
constant of proportionality and explain what it means in the con text of this problem.
Port Canaveral Docking Fees
Boat Length (in feet) Daily Fee (in dollars)
15 feet $33.75
17 feet $38.25
20 feet $45.00
21 feet $47.25
Part B. The daily fee for docking a boat at a marina in Fort Lauderdale is also proportional
to the length of the boat. The graph displays the relationship between the fee and the
boat length. Find the constant of proportionality and explain what it means in the
context of this problem.
Fort Lauderdale
Daily Fee (in
Boat Length (in feet)
Part C. At which marina is it less expensive to dock a boat? Explain how you determined
your answer.
Instructional Items
Instructional Item 1
After a workout at the gym, three friends made protein s hakes to help in their recovery. Each
protein shake contains 2 scoops of protein powder and 12 ounces of water. What is the
constant of proportionality for this relationship?
Instructional Item 2
Determine the constant of proportionality for the following proportional relationships.
x 3 4 6 9
1. y 4.5 6 9 13.5 2.
*The strategies, tasks and items included in the B1G - M are examples and should not be considered comprehensive.
MA.7.AR.4.3
Benchmark
55 | P a g e

===== B1G-M-Grd7-TI · page 56 =====
Given a mathematical or real - world context, graph proportional relationships
MA.7.AR.4.3
from a table, equ ation or a written description.
Benchmark Clarifications:
Clarification 1: Instruction includes equations of proportional relationships in the form of 𝑦 = 𝑝𝑥 , where
𝑝 is the constant of proportionality.
Connecting Benchmarks/Horizontal Alignment Terms from the K - 12 Glossary
• MA.7.NSO.2 • C onstant of P roportionality
• MA.7.AR.3.3 • P roportional R elationships
Vertical Alignment
Previous Benchmarks Next Benchmarks
• MA.6.AR.3.4 , MA.6.AR.3.5 • MA.8.AR.3. 4
• MA.6.GR.1.1
Purpose and Instructional Strategies
In grade 6, students solved problems involving ratios, rates and unit rates, and began plotting
points on the coordinate plane. In grade 7, students begin working with proportional
relationships, including graphing proportional relationships given a table, equation or written
description. In grade 8, students will determine if a linear relationship is proportional and graph
two - variable linear equations from a written description, table or equation.
• Instruction includes different ways of representing proportional relationships, such as
tables, equations, and graph s. Multiplying or dividing one quantity in a ratio by a
particular factor requires doing the same with the other quantity in the ratio to maintain
the proportional relationship. Graphing equivalent ratios create a straight line passing
through the origin. The equations generated with the ratios will be unique in that they will
follow the form of 𝑦 = 𝑝𝑥 .
o T ables
𝒙 5 40 65
𝒚 1 8 13
o E quations
1
𝑦 = 𝑥
5
• Given one representation, have students provide the other t hree in order to determine
their mastery of these equivalencies (as noted in MA.7.AR.4.4 ).
o For example, if given a written description, have students provide a table, an
equation and a graph of the given proportional relationship.
• Students should understand that although the most common variable used to represent the
constant of proportionality is 𝑝 , any other variable can be used.
o For example, students can write the equation 𝑝 = 1 . 6 or 𝑘 = 1 . 6 to state that the
constant of proportionality is 1 . 6 given the equation 𝑦 = 1 . 6 𝑥 .
• W hen an equation or written description is given , and have students c reate a
corresponding table of values to assist with graphing. Be sure to e mphasize use of the
origin as one of the points for the table ( MTR.2.1 ).
Common Misconceptions or Errors
• Students may confuse the dependent and independent variables when graphing. To
address this conception, instruction includes the understanding that the independent
56 | P a g e

===== B1G-M-Grd7-TI · page 57 =====
variable depends on the given context. Additionally, independent variable s are not always
the 𝑥 - axis and the dependent variable s are not always the 𝑦 - axis.
o For example, if a student has a proportional relationship between feet and meters,
they can graph feet either on the 𝑥 - axis or the 𝑦 - axis. Which one that is dependent
depends on the context. For instance, if one is given feet and converting to meters,
th en feet would be independent and meters would be dependent
• Students may confuse the 𝑥 - and 𝑦 - axis.
• Students may not recognize the appropriate axis scale to graph the given scenario
efficiently.
o For example, if a situation involves fractional numbers, using a scale of 1 may not
be appropriate. Instead, students should consider using a scale with a fractional
value.
Strategies to Support Tiered Instruction
• Instruction focuses on students’ comprehension of the context or situation by engaging in
questions ( laminating these questions on a printed card for students to utilize as a
resource in and out of the classroom would be helpful).
o What do you know from the problem?
o What is the problem asking you to find?
o What are the two quantities in this problem?
o How are the quantities related to each other?
o Which quantity do you want to consider as the independent variable?
o Which quantity do you want to consider as the d ependent variable?
• Instruction includes co - creating a graphic organizer with key features of coordinate plane
such as 𝑥 - axis, 𝑦 - axis, or igin, quadrants, scales, origin and coordinates.
• Instruction includes the understanding that the independent variable depends on the given
context. Additionally, independent variables are not always the 𝑥 - axis and the dependent
variables are not always the 𝑦 - axis.
o For example, if one has a proportional relationship between feet and meters,
students can graph feet either on the 𝑥 - axis or the 𝑦 - axis. The dependent variable
depends on the context. For instance, if one is given feet and converting to meters,
then feet would be independent and meters would be dependent.
• Teacher provides instruction on creating a table of values to assist graphing an equation
on a coordinate plane.
Coordinate
𝒙 𝒚 = 𝟐𝒙 𝒚
Points
𝑦 = 2 ( − 2 )
− 2 − 4 ( − 2 , − 4 )
𝑦 = − 4
𝑦 = 2 ( 0 )
0 0 ( 0 , 0 )
𝑦 = 0
𝑦 = 2 ( 6 )
6 12 ( 6 , 12 )
𝑦 = 12
• Instruction includes modeling how to properly use a scale when situations involve
fractional numbers. Instead of using a scale of 1, use a scale with a fractional value.
Instructional Tasks
57 | P a g e

===== B1G-M-Grd7-TI · page 58 =====
Instructional Task 1 (MTR.5.1)
Coffee costs $18.96 for 3 pounds at the store, CoffeeUs.
Part A. What is the cost per pound of coffee?
Part B. At CoffeeUs , the price for a pound of coffee is the same no matter how many
pounds you buy. Let 𝑥 be the number of pounds of coffee and 𝑦 be the total cost
of 𝑥 pounds. Draw a graph of the proportional relationship between the number of
pounds of coffee and the to tal cost.
Part C. Where can you see the cost per pound of coffee in the graph? What is it?
Instructional Items
Instructional Item 1
The cost of Hass avocados is a proportional relationship to the number of avocados being
purchased. The equation 𝑐 = 2 . 10 𝑎 represents this relationship where 𝑐 is the total cost and
𝑎 is the number of Hass avocados being purchased. Create a graph representing this
relationship.
Instructional Item 2
Graph the proportional relationship given in the table below.
𝒙 1 2 4 5
5 25
𝒚 5 10
2 2
*The strategies, tasks and items included in the B1G - M are examples and should not be considered comprehensive.
58 | P a g e

===== B1G-M-Grd7-TI · page 59 =====
MA.7.AR.4.4
Benchmark
Given any representation of a proportional relationship, translate the
MA.7.AR.4.4
representation to a written description, table or equation.
Example: The written description, there are 60 minutes in 1 hour, can be represented as the
equation 𝑚 = 60ℎ .
Example: Gina works as a babysitter and earns $9 per hour. She would like to earn $100 to buy a
new tennis racket. Gina wants to know how many hours she ne eds to work. She can use
1
the equation ℎ = 𝑒 , where 𝑒 is the amount of money earned, ℎ is the number of hours
9
1
worked and is the constant of proportionality.
9
Benchmark Clarifications:
Clarification 1: Given representations are limited to a written desc ription, graph, table or equation.
Clarification 2: Instruction includes equations of proportional relationships in the form of 𝑦 = 𝑝𝑥 , where
𝑝 is the constant of proportionality.
Connecting Benchmarks/Horizontal Alignment Terms from the K - 12 Glossary
• MA.7.NSO.2 • C onstant of P roportionality
• MA.7.AR.3 • P roportional R elationships
• R ate
• U nit R ates
Vertical Alignment
Previous Benchmarks Next Benchmarks
• MA.6.AR.1.1 • MA.8.AR.3. 2 , MA.8.AR.3. 3 ,
MA.8.AR.3.4
• MA.6.AR.3.2 , MA.6.AR.3.5
Purpose and Instructional Strategies
In grade 6, students translated written descriptions into algebraic expressions and translate
algebraic expressions into written descriptions. In grade 7, students translate any representation
of a proportional relationship to a written description, table or equation. In grade 8, students will
extend this work to include linear relationships .
• Instruction includes different ways of representing proportional relations hips, such as
tables, equations and graphs. Multiplying or dividing one quantity in a rat io by a
particular factor requires doing the same with the other quantity in the ratio to maintain
the proportional relationship. Graphing equivalent ratios create a straight line passing
through the origin. The equations generated with the ratios will be unique in that they will
follow the form of 𝑦 = 𝑝𝑥 .
o T ables
𝒙 5 40 65
𝒚 1 8 13
o E quations
1
𝑦 = 𝑥
5
o G raphs
59 | P a g e

===== B1G-M-Grd7-TI · page 60 =====
• When providing a graph, be sure there are easily identifiable points for students to use in
calculating the constant of proportionality.
• As students are building meaning, instruction makes connections between the different
representations.
• Even though proportional relationships exist in Quadrant I, instruction includes
opportunities for students to realize that the line does continue into Quadrant III but are
not appropriate for the real - world situation.
• Students should be able to explain examples from the points on a graph or the numbers
within the table by putting it back into the real - world context when appropriate.
• Instruction includes flexibility in understanding of the dependent and independent
variables. Students can represent situa tions in terms of 𝑥 or in terms of 𝑦 .
o For instance, within example 1 students can represent the situation as 𝑚 = 60ℎ or
1
ℎ = 𝑚 .
60
• Students should construct verbal descriptions.
o For example, a student might describe the situation as “the number of packs of
gum times the cost for each pac k is the total cost in dollars.” They can use the
verbal model to construct the equation.
• Students can check the equation by substituting values and comparing t heir results to the
table. The checking process helps students revise and recheck their model as necessary
( MTR.6.1 ).
• Provide tables of values for various proportional relationships. Ask students to look at the
tables and generalize how they can find the 𝑦 - value in the tables given any 𝑥 - value
( MTR.1.1 ). Ha ve students look for patterns and assist with developing the equation 𝑦 =
𝑝𝑥 where 𝑝 is the constant of proportionality ( MTR.5.1 ).
• Ensure the formal development of the equation 𝑦 = 𝑝𝑥 where 𝑝 is the constant of
proportionality. Instruction supports fle xibility in the variable used for the constant of
proportionality. Provide practice for students to develop this equation using different
variables based on given scenarios, as in Example 2 .
Common Misconceptions or Errors
• Students may neglect the scales on the axes when calculating and interpreting the
constant of proportionality.
• Students may not be able to approximate the constant of proportionality from the graphs.
To address this misconception, begin with graphs having easily identifiable points before
moving toward problems that need approximations.
• Students may not see the connection between the constant of proportionality and the
60 | P a g e

===== B1G-M-Grd7-TI · page 61 =====
steepness of the graph. To address this misconception, provide a variety of graphs with
various steepness and ask students to organize them based on increasing order of the
constants of proportionality.
Strategies to Support Tiered Instruction
• Instruction includes utilizing the 𝑥 - and 𝑦 - axis when determining the constant of
proportionality. Teacher provides instruction on locating the values for the variables 𝑦
and 𝑥 from the axis labels , rather than counting the minor g ridlines to the chosen point on
the graph .
• Instruction includes ut ilizing graphs containing easily identifiable points on minor
gridlines before moving toward graphs containing points that lie between gridlines which
requires estimation to determine an appropriate constant of proportionality.
• Instruction includes the co - creation of a graphic organizer containing examples of
proportional relationships with increasing levels of steepness. For each example, include
a real - w orld scenario, a table, a graph and the constant of proportionality.
• Instruction includes using letters for variables that relate to the given scenario, such as 𝑤
for water.
• For students that are not able to approximate the constant of proportionality from the
graphs, begin with graphs having easily identifiable points before moving toward
problems that need approximations. For students that cannot see the connection between
t he constant of proportionality and the steepness of the graph, provide a variety of graphs
with various steepness and ask students to organize them based on increasing order of the
constants of proportionality.
Instructional Tasks
Instructional Task 1 (MTR.5.1)
Kell works at an after - school program at an elementary school. The table below shows how
much money he earned every day last week.
Monday Wednesday Friday
time worked 1.5 hours 2.5 hours 4 hours
money earned $12.60 $21.00 $33.60
Mariko has a job mowing lawns that pays $7 per hour.
Part A . Who would make more money for working 10 hours? Explain or show work.
Part B . Draw a graph that represents 𝑦 , the amount of money Kell would make for
working 𝑥 hours, assuming h e made the same hourly rate he was making last
week.
Part C. Using the same coordinate axes, draw a graph that represents 𝑦 , the amount of
money Mariko would make for working 𝑥 hours.
Part D. How can you see who makes more per hour just by looking at the graphs?
Explain.
Part E . Write one equation to represent the how much money Kell earns in 𝑥 hours and
one equation to represent how much money Mariko earns in ℎ hours .
Instructional Items
Instructional Item 1
Kelsi works as a lifeguard at the local pool. After an 8 hour day at work, she earns $100.
Part A. Write an equation that describes the relationship between the number of hours
worked and the amount of money that she earns.
61 | P a g e

===== B1G-M-Grd7-TI · page 62 =====
Part B. Kelsi would like to earn $450 to buy a new gaming system. Use your equation to
determine how many hours she needs to work to buy a new gaming system .
*The strategies, tasks and items included in the B1G - M are examples and should not be considered comprehensive.
MA.7.AR.4.5
Benchmark
MA.7.AR.4.5 Solve real - world problems involving proportional relationships.
Example: Gordy is taking a trip from Tallahassee, FL to Portland, Maine which is about 1,407
miles. On average his SUV gets 23.1 miles per gallon on the highway and his gas tanks
holds 17.5 gallons. If Gordy starts with a full tank of gas, how many times will he b e
required to fill the gas tank?
Connecting Benchmarks/Horizontal Alignment Terms from the K - 12 Glossary
• MA.7.NSO.2 • P roportional R elationships
• MA.7.AR.3 • R ate
• MA.7.DP.1.3 , MA.7.DP.1.4 • U nit R ates
Vertical Alignment
Previous Benchmarks Next Benchmarks
• MA.6.AR.3.5 • MA.8.AR.3. 4, MA.8.AR.3.5
Purpose and Instructional Strategies
In grade 6, students solved mathematical and real - world problems involving ratios, rates and unit
rates, including comparisons, mixtures, ratios of lengths and conversions within the same
measurement system. In grade 7, students solve real - world problems involving proportional
relationships. In grade 8, students will solve real - world problems involving linear relationships.
• This benchmark is a culmination of the work students have been doing throughout
MA.7.AR.4.
• Instruction for this benchmark includes opportunities to compare two different
proportional relationships to each other.
• Allow various methods for solving, encouraging discussion and analysis of efficient and
effective solutions ( MTR.4.1 ).
•
Common Misconceptions or Errors
• Students may confuse the dependent and independent variables when graphing. To
address this conception, instruction includes the understanding that the independent
variable depends on the given context. Additionally, independent variable s are not always
on the 𝑥 - axis and the dependent variable s are not always on the 𝑦 - axis.
o For example, if one has a proportional relationship between feet and meters, they
can graph feet either on the 𝑥 - axis or the 𝑦 - axis. Which one that is dependent
depends on the context. For instance, if one is given feet and converting to meters,
then feet would be independent and meters would be dependent.
62 | P a g e

===== B1G-M-Grd7-TI · page 63 =====
Strategies to Support Tiered Instruction
• Teacher provides opportunities for students to comprehend the context or situation by
engaging in questions.
o What do you know from the problem?
o What is the problem asking you to find?
o What are the two quantities in this problem?
o How are the quantities related to each other?
o Which quantity do you want to consider as the independent variable?
o Which quantity do you want to consider as the de pendent variable?
• Instruction includes the use a three - read strategy. Students read the problem three
different times, each with a different purpose.
o First, read the problem with the purpose of answering the question: What is the
problem, context, or stor y about?
o Second, read the problem with the purpose of answering the question: What are
we trying to find out?
o Third, read the problem with the purpose of answering the question: What
information is important in the problem?
• Instruction includes the underst anding that the independent variable depends on the given
context. Additionally, independent variables are not always the 𝑥 - axis and the dependent
variable are not always the 𝑦 - axis.
o For example, if one has a proportional relationship between feet and me ters, they
can graph feet either on the 𝑥 - axis or the 𝑦 - axis. Which one that is dependent
depends on the context. For instance, if one is given feet and converting to meters,
then feet would be independent and meters would be dependent.
Instructional Tasks
Instructional Task 1 (MTR.4.1)
Patsy is making shortbread cookies using the ingredients below.
10 tablespoons of butter
1
1 1 cups flour
1 cups powdered sugar 2
2 1
1 teaspoon salt
2
teaspoon vanilla extract
2
Part A. This recipe makes 16 cookies, but Patsy needs 5 dozen. How much of each
ingredient will she need to make the 5 dozen cookies she needs?
Part B. Once Harrison tasted Patsy’s shortbread cookies, he ordered 7 dozen for a
birthday party. If Patsy originally st arted with 4 cups of flour, 2 cups of powdered
sugar and 16 tablespoons of butter , how much more (if any) will she need of each
ingredient to complete Harrison’s order?
3
Part C. After the party, Jeb sha red his recipe which calls for 2 cups of flour and 1 cup
4
of powdered sugar . Since adding powdered sugar to cookies should make them
sweeter , Jeb claims his larger ratio of powdered sugar to flour will produce
sweeter cookies. Is this statement correct?
Instructional Items
Instructional Item 1
A couple is taking a horse and carriage ride through Central Park in New York City. A fter 8
1
minutes, they had travel ed mile.
2
63 | P a g e

===== B1G-M-Grd7-TI · page 64 =====
Part A. Create a graph to represent the proportional relationship between miles traveled
and the number of minutes they are on the carriage.
Part B. Use this graph to determine how long will it take to complete th e 2.5 mile ride
around the park.
*The strategies, tasks and items included in the B1G - M are examples and should not be considered comprehensive.
64 | P a g e

===== B1G-M-Grd7-TI · page 65 =====
Geometric Reasoning
MA.7. GR .1 Solve problems involving two - dimensional figures, including circles .
MA.7.GR.1.1
Benchmark
MA.7.GR.1.1 Apply formulas to find the areas of trapezoids, parallelograms and rhombi.
Benchmark Clarifications:
Clarification 1: Instruction focuses on the connection from the areas of trapezoids, parallelograms and
rhombi to the areas of rectangles or triangles.
Clarification 2: Within this benchmark, the expectation is not to memorize area formulas for trapezoids,
parallelograms and rhombi.
Connecting Benchmarks/Horizontal Alignment Terms from the K - 12 Glossary
• MA.7.NSO.2 • A rea
• P arallelogram
• R ectangle
• R hombus
• T riangle
• T rapezoid
Vertical Alignment
Previous Benchmarks Next Benchmarks
• MA.6.GR.2.1 , MA.6.GR.2.2 • MA.912.GR. 3.3
• MA. 912.GR.4.4
Purpose and Instructional Strategies
In grade 6, students solved problems involving the area of quadrilaterals and composite figures
by decomposing them into triangles or rectangles. In grade 7, students apply formulas to find the
areas of trapezoids, parallelograms and rhombi. In high school , students will extend this
knowledge to solv e mathematical and real - world problems involving the perimeter or area of any
polygon using coordinate geometry and other tools.
• Instruction includes using students’ prior knowledge of finding the area of a rect angle to
build the area formulas for trapezoids, parallelograms and rhombi. The use of grid paper
can support students in counting the squares to verify the areas are accurate.
• Investigations and explore activities for students can include:
o Draw or provid e a cutout of a rhombus. Slice the rhombus vertically at a right
angle. Slide the sliced off portion to form a square so students can see the base
and height of the square are the same as that of the rhombus ( MTR.5.1 ).
o Draw or provide a cutout of a parallelogram. Slice the parallelogram vertically at
a right angle. Slide the sliced off portion to form a rectangle so students can see
65 | P a g e

===== B1G-M-Grd7-TI · page 66 =====
the base and height of the rectangle are the same as that of the parallelogram
( MTR.5.1 ).
o Draw or provide a cutout of a trapezoid. Duplicate the trapezoid using patty paper
or tracing paper and rotate it to form a larger parallelogram formed with both
figures. The base of the parallelogram then becomes the sum of the two bases of
the original trapezoid while the height is the perpendicular height of the original
trapezoid. The area is one half of the area of this parallelogram since it contains
two identical trapezoids ( MTR.5.1 ).
• Instruction includes the comparison of formulas between rectangles, trapezoids,
pa rallelograms and rhombi.
Common Misconceptions or Errors
• Students may incorrectly identify a side length as a height rather than using the
perpendicular distance between the bases. To address this misconception, use cutouts or
measuring tools to show that these distances are not the same; consider using physical
objects that are not square or rectangular to make sense of finding the correct height.
• Students may not properly locate the height or base(s) when using figures in various
orientations. To address this misconception, provide multiple orientations of obje cts and
figures. Note that parallelograms are like rectangles, in that any side can be considered a
base, so there are two possible heights.
Strategies to Support Tiered Instruction
• Teacher models measuring the length and height of a given shape to demonstrate the
di fference between the dimensions.
• Instruction includes the use of manipulatives or geometric software to demonstrate the
similarity of trapezoids, parallelograms and rhombi to square, rectangles, and triangles.
• Teacher co - creates a graphic organizer with images and formulas for trapezoids,
parallelograms and rhombi and uses different colors to connect the dimensions of the
figures to the variables within the formulas.
• Teacher uses cutouts or measuring tools to show that the length of the side of a figure is
not necessarily the same as its height. C onsider using physical objects that are not square
or rectangular to make sense of finding the correct height.
Instructional Tasks
Instructional Task 1 (MTR.5.1)
66 | P a g e

===== B1G-M-Grd7-TI · page 67 =====
Trace a parallelogram or a rhombus on a sheet of graph paper. Highlight (or color) each of
the sides a different color. Slice your two - dimensional figure vertically from a vertex at a
right angle to an opposite side, to create a right triangle. Move the sliced - off portion to form
a rectangle.
Part A . What are the length and width of the created rectangle?
Part B . Determine the formula for finding the area of your two - dimensional figure .
Part C. Compare your two - dimensional figure and formula with a partner. What do you
notice?
Instructional Task 2 (MTR.5.1)
Duplicate the trapezoid given below using patty paper or tracing paper and color the
o
corresponding bases the same color. Cut out both trapezoids. Rotate one trapezoid 180 and
line it up next to the other.
Part A. What figure has formed?
Part B. What is the formula for figure’s area? Use this information to determine the
formula for finding the area of a trapezoid.
Instructional Items
Instructional Item 1
A new park is being built in the shape of a trapezoid, as shown in the diagram below. The
builders will cover the ground with a solid rubber surface to ensure the children playing have
a safe and soft place to land when they jump or fall. How many square yards of rubber will
be needed for this park?
Instructional Item 2
Find the area of the figure below .
67 | P a g e

===== B1G-M-Grd7-TI · page 68 =====
*The strategies, tasks and items included in the B1G - M are examples and should not be considered comprehensive.
MA.7.GR.1.2
Benchmark
Solve mathematical or real - world problems involving the area of polygons or
MA.7.GR.1.2
composite figures by decomposing them into triangles or quadrilaterals.
Benchmark Clarifications:
Clarification 1: Within this benchmark, the expectation is not to find areas of figures on the coordinate
plane or to find missing dimensions.
Connecting Benchmarks/Horizontal Alignment Terms from the K - 12 Glossary
• MA.7.NSO.2 • A rea
• C omposite F igure
• P olygon
• Q uadrilateral
• T riangle
Vertical Alignment
Previous Benchmarks Next Benchmarks
• MA.6.GR.2.2 • MA.912.GR.3.4
• MA.912.GR.4.3 , MA.912.GR.4.4
Purpose and Instructional Strategies
In grade 6, students solved problems involving the area of quadrilaterals and composite figures
by decomposing them into triangles or rectangles. In grade 7, students solve problems involving
the area of polygons or composite figures by decomposing them in to triangles or quadrilaterals.
In high school, students will extend this knowledge to solv e mathematical and real - world
problems involving the p erimeter or area of any polygon using coordinate geometry and other
tools.
• Instruction includes problems where multiple decompositions are possible so students
understand the various pathways to a solution ( MTR.5.1 ). Scaffolded instruction may
include figures on grid paper to allow students to more easily count the total area. Select
and order student solutions to be shared with the whole group ( MTR.4.1 ), depicting
various solution pathways.
• Instruction includes figures where an efficient method is to subtract a basic figure from a
larger figure.
o Students should use grid paper to draw a polygon that is composed of triangles
and quadrilaterals that can be exchanged with a partner or within a group to find
the corresponding areas.
Common Misconceptions or Errors
68 | P a g e

===== B1G-M-Grd7-TI · page 69 =====
• Students may neglect to add the areas of the decomposed figures to find the total area of
the composite figure. Students may also incorrectly add one (or more) of the decomposed
figures more than once. To address misconceptions, have students mark or color the
figures as they add them to the total to keep track of their work (MTR.3.1) .
• Students may not decompose the figure into the most basic figures. To address this
misconception, ask students if they c an find the area of each of the pieces they have, or if
they can break any of them down further to find a more familiar figure (MTR.5.1) .
Strategies to Support Tiered Instruction
• Instruction includes writing the area of each decomposed figure inside the original figure
and placing a check next to each of the decomposed areas as they are added to determine
the total area of the composite figure.
• Teacher provides geometric software for students to interact with composite figures to
develop unders tanding of how to decompose two dimensional figures.
• Teacher provides paper cutouts of different composite figures for students to fold or cut
into triangles or quadrilaterals to visually understand how to decompose the area.
• Instruction includes color - coding parallel bases or heights to assist in determine missing
measurements of composite figures.
o For example, given the figure below (assuming the two right triangles have the
same side lengths as each other), students can highlight the parallel bases of the
rectangle.
• Teacher has students mark or color the figures as they add them to the total to keep track
of their work (MTR.3.1) .
• Teacher asks students if they can find the area of each of the pieces they have, or if they
can break any of them down further to find a mo re familiar figure (MTR.5.1) .
Instructional Tasks
Instructional Task 1 (MTR.6.1)
After a recent storm, Evan has been offered two jobs to replace patio screens. The layouts for
the screens needed at both locations are given below. The shaded part represents a stone
layout that does not need to be screened.
Job #1
69 | P a g e

===== B1G-M-Grd7-TI · page 70 =====
Job #2
If Evan gets paid by the square inch and would like the highest paying job, which job should
he take? Justify your reasoning.
Instructional Task 2 (MTR.3.1)
Tyler and Samantha are building the set for a school play. The design shown below was cut
out of woo d and now needs to be covered in fabric.
Part A. If e ach square in the grid has a length of one foot , estimate the total area of wood that
needs to be covered. Justify your answer.
Part B. What is the exact total area of the wood , in feet, that needs to be covered? Share your
strategy with a partner.
Instructional Items
Instructional Item 1
Find the area of the figure below. Note that the figure may not be drawn to scale.
70 | P a g e

===== B1G-M-Grd7-TI · page 71 =====
Instructional Item 2
Bena is building a kite based on the design shown below. Determine how much ripstop nylon
she will need to purchase for the sail material.
*The strategies, tasks and items included in the B1G - M are examples and should not be considered comprehensive.
MA.7.GR.1.3
Benchmark
Explore the proportional relationship between circumferences and diameters of
MA.7.GR.1.3 circles. Apply a formula for the circumference of a circle to solve
mathematical and real - world problems.
Benchmark Clarifications:
Clarification 1: Instruction includes the exploration and analysis of circular objects to examine the
proportional relationship between circumference and diameter and arrive at an approximation of pi ( 𝜋 ) as
the constant of proportionality.
Clarification 2: Solutions may be represented in terms of pi ( 𝜋 ) or approximately.
Connecting Benchmarks/Horizontal Alignment Terms from the K - 12 Glossary
• MA.7.NSO.2 • C ircumference
• MA.7.AR.4.1 , MA.7.AR.4.2 • C onstant of P roportionality
• D iameter
• P i ( 𝜋 )
71 | P a g e

===== B1G-M-Grd7-TI · page 72 =====
• P roportional R elationship
Vertical Alignment
Previous Benchmarks Next Benchmarks
• MA.6.GR.1.3 • MA.8.GR. 1.2
• MA.912.GR. 7.2, MA.912.GR.7.3
Purpose and Instructional Strategies
In grade 6, students solved problems involving the perimeter and area of two - dimensional
figures. In grade 7, students explore the proportional relationship between circumferences and
diameters of circles and develop and learn a formula to solve circumference problems. In grade
8, students will learn and use the Pythagorean Theorem to find the distance between points in the
coordinate plane, and this builds the foundation for the equation of a circle in high school
geometry.
• Instruction inc ludes opportunities for students to see circular or cylindrical household
objects of different sizes. Students will measure the diameter and the circumference of
the circle in each object to the nearest tenth of a centimeter to arrive at an approximation
o f pi ( 𝜋 ) as the constant of proportionality. Students can record the values in a table and
plot the points on a coordinate plane to discover the pattern that arises ( MTR.5.1 ).
Students should complete multiple trials to best support their conclusions usin g both
radius and diameter.
Trial #1
𝐶
DIAMETER CIRCUMFERENCE ( )
𝑑
CIRCLE A
CIRCLE B
CIRCLE C
CIRCLE D
Trial #2
𝐶
RADIUS CIRCUMFERENCE ( )
2 𝑟
CIRCLE E
CIRCLE F
CIRCLE G
CIRCLE H
• Instruction emphasizes the relationship between radius and diameter so students will
easily move between the equivalent forms of the circumference formula ( MTR.3.1 ).
• Instruction includes student understanding that circumference of a circle is the same as
perimeter of any other two - dimensional figure.
355 22
• Students are expected to know approximations of pi ( , or 3 . 14 ) .
113 7
Common Misconceptions or Errors
• Students may invert the terms radius and diameter. To address this misconception, review
parts of a circle including radii, diameters and chords.
72 | P a g e

===== B1G-M-Grd7-TI · page 73 =====
• Students may incorrectly believe pi is a variable, rather than a constant for every circle.
• Students may confuse circumference and area. To address this misconception, help
students connect circumference as perimeter of a circle.
Strategies to Support Tiered Instruction
• Teacher provides opportunities for students to measure the radius and diameter of various
circles and to explore and discuss the similarities and differences between radius and
diameter.
• To clarify misconceptions between the relationship of the diameter a nd circumference,
instruction includes solving for the constant of proportionality between a given diameter
and circumference of a circle and discussing the patterns that arise. Teacher provides
opportunities for students to solve for the circumference of a given circle in terms of pi
before replacing the value of pi with an approximation to determine the estimated
circumference.
• Teacher co - constructs a graphic organizer with students containing color - coded examples
o f circumference, area, diameter and radius.
Instructional Tasks
Instructional Task 1 (MTR.4.1, MTR.7.1)
Amy and Eunice are participating in a bike - a - thon this weekend. Amy has 29 - inch road bike
wheels and Eunice has 26 - inch mountain bike wheels, where the bike wheel measurements
are based on their diameter.
P art A. If they choose a bike - a - thon distance of 5 miles, whose bike wheels will need to
do the fewest revolutions to reach the finish line?
Part B. How many more revolutions will the other bike need to make to reach the finish
line? Explain your reasoning.
Instructional Items
Instructional Item 1
Determine the circumference of the following circles.
Instructional Item 2
When baking an apple pie, a strip of aluminum foil needs to be placed around the edge of the
1
crust until the last 20 minutes of baking so that it will not burn. If using a 9 - inch diameter
2
pie pan, how long should the strip of foil b e ?
73 | P a g e

===== B1G-M-Grd7-TI · page 74 =====
*The strategies, tasks and items included in the B1G - M are examples and should not be considered comprehensive.
MA.7.GR.1.4
Benchmark
Explore and apply a formula to find the area of a circle to solve mathematical
MA.7.GR.1.4
and real - world problems.
Example: If a 12 - inch pizza is cut into 6 equal slices and Mikel ate 2 slices, how many square
inches of pizza did he eat?
Benchmark Clarifications:
Clarification 1: Instruction focuses on the connection between formulas for the area of a rectangle and the
area of a circle.
Clarification 2: Problem types include finding areas of fractional parts of a circle.
Clarification 3: Solutions may be represented in terms of pi ( 𝜋 ) or approximately.
Connecting Benchmarks/Horizontal Alignment Terms from the K - 12 Glossary
• MA.7.NSO.2 • A rea
• MA.7. AR.4.1 • C ircle
• MA.7.GR.2 • P i ( 𝜋 )
• MA.7.DP.1.4 • R ectangle
Vertical Alignment
Previous Benchmarks Next Benchmarks
• MA.6.GR.2.2 • MA.912.GR.4.4 , MA.912.GR.4.6
• MA.912.GR.6.4
Purpose and Instructional Strategies
In grade 6, students found the areas of rectangles and triangles, and solved problems involving
the area of quadrilaterals and composite figures by decomposing them into triangles or
rectangles. In grade 7, students find the area of a circles and other geometric figures. In both
grade 7 and high school, students build on their knowledge of area to find the surfa ce areas and
volumes of various three - dimensional figures.
• Students are not expected to memorize the formula for the area of a circle ( MTR.5.1 ).
355 22
• Students are expected to know approximations of pi ( , or 3 . 14 ) .
113 7
• Instruction includes students exploring circles. Provide students with a circle and have
them highlight the circumference. Students will then fold the circle in half, half again,
and half once more to allow them to cut it into 8 wedges of equal size. Then arrange the
wedges s o they alternately point up and down, forming a rectangle, with the highlighted
circumference being the bases. Ensure students realize that the length of the rectangle is
approximately equal to half the circumference, or 𝜋𝑟 , of the circle and the height of the
rectangle is equal to the radius, 𝑟 , of the circle ( MTR.4.1 ).
o For more accuracy, provide a circle with dashed lined for students to cut the circle
into 16 equal - sized wedges.
74 | P a g e

===== B1G-M-Grd7-TI · page 75 =====
o Have students describe the area of a circle and explain if the area of a circle
changes if it is cut up and rearranged.
o Ask questions to elicit student thinking ( MTR.4.1 ) such as:
▪ What formula was used to find the area of a circle?
▪ How is the formula for the area of a circle related to the formula for the
area of a parallelogram?
• Instruction includes using circles on grid paper for students to estimate area before
making precise calculations.
• The expectation of this benchmark is not to find the radius or diameter of a circle when
given the area.
Common Misconceptions or Errors
• Students may invert the terms radius and diameter. To address this misconception, review
parts of a circle including radii, diameters and chords.
• Students may incorrectly believe pi ( 𝜋 ) is a variable, rather than a constant that does not
change from one circle to the next . Review the development of pi in MA.7.GR.1.3.
• Students may confuse circumference and area. To address this misconception, help
students connect area of a circle to area of a rectangle.
• Students may incorrectly double the radius (finding diameter), rather than squaring it,
when finding an area. To address this misconception, review exponent rules from
MA.6.NSO.3.3 and MA.7.NSO.1.1.
Strategies to Support Tiered Instruction
• Teacher provides opportunities for students to measure the radius and diameter of various
circles to explore and discuss the similarities and differences between radius and
diameter.
• Instruction includes modeling the area of a given circle in terms of pi before replacing the
value of pi with an approximation to determine the estimated area.
• Teacher co - constructs a graphic organizer with students containing color - coded examples
of circumference, area, diameter and radius.
• Teacher co - constructs a table to find the constant proportionality between the diameter
and circumference of a circle, allowing students to discover the pattern that represents pi
( 𝜋 ).
75 | P a g e

===== B1G-M-Grd7-TI · page 76 =====
• Instruction includes modeling the differences between doubling and squaring a radius.
Doubling a radius would be represented by multiplying the given length by 2 , whereas
squaring a number would be represented by the area of a square with the given radius.
o For example, students can be given the table below to show how the left column
doubles a length whereas the right column squares a length.
Given length of 5 Given length of 5
2
Representing 5 ∙ 2 Representing 5
• Instruction includes rewriting the area formula for a circle in expanded form before
evaluating.
2
o For example , the formula for the area of a circle, 𝐴 = 𝜋 𝑟 , can be rewritten as
𝐴 = ( 𝜋 ) ( 𝑟 ) ( 𝑟 ) .
• Teacher helps students connect area of a circle to area of a rectangle.
Instructional Tasks
Instructional Task 1 (MTR.1.1)
The figure below is composed of eight circles, seven small circles and one large circle
containing them all. Neighboring circles only share one point, and two regions between the
smaller circles have been shaded. Each small circle has a radius of 5 c entimeters .
Part A. What is the area of the large circle?
Part B. What is the area of the shaded part of the figure?
Instructional Items
Instructional Item 1
What is the area of a circle whose radius is 4 c enti m eters ? Round to the nearest hundredth.
Instructional Item 2
Find the exact area , in centimeters (cm), of each circle below.
76 | P a g e

===== B1G-M-Grd7-TI · page 77 =====
Instructional Item 3
Jamilah wants to add to her kitchen countertop, which is currently in the shape of a rectangle.
If she adds the solid , semicircular piece shown in the picture below, determine how many
square feet , to the nearest tenth of a foot, of ma rble Jamilah will need for the addition.
*The strategies, tasks and items included in the B1G - M are examples and should not be considered comprehensive.
MA.7.GR.1.5
Benchmark
Solve mathematical and real - world problems involving dimensions and areas
MA.7.GR.1.5
of geometric figures, including scale drawings and scale factors.
Benchmark Clarifications:
Clarification 1: Instruction focuses on seeing the scale factor as a constant of proportionality between
corresponding lengths in the scale drawing and the original object.
Clarification 2: Instruction includes the understanding that if the scaling factor is 𝑘 , then the constant of
2
proportionality between corresponding areas is 𝑘 .
Clarification 3: Problem types include finding the scale factor given a set of dimensions as well as
finding dimensions when given a scale factor.
Connecting Benchmarks/Horizontal Alignment Terms from the K - 12 Glossary
• MA.7.NSO.2 • A rea
• MA.7.AR.3.3 • C onstant of P roportionality
• MA.7.AR.4. 1 , MA.7.AR.4.2 , • S cale F actor
MA.7.AR.4.5
77 | P a g e

===== B1G-M-Grd7-TI · page 78 =====
Vertical Alignment
Previous Benchmarks Next Benchmarks
• MA.6. AR.3.5 • MA.8.GR.2.2
• MA.6.GR. 1.3 • MA.912.GR.4.3
• MA.6. G R. 2.2
Purpose and Instructional Strategies
In grade 6, students solved problems relating to the perimeter or area of a rectangle as well as the
area of composite figures by decomposing them into triangles or rectangles. In grade 7, students
solve mathematical and real - world problems involving dimen sions and areas of geometric
figures, including scale drawings and scale factors. In grade 8, students will continue to work
with scale factor and apply it to dilations before moving to high school and determining how
dilations affect the area of two - dimensional figures and the surface area or volume of three -
dimensional figures.
• Scale drawings of geometric figures connect proportionality to geometry, which leads to
future work in similarity and congruence. Initially, students explore scale drawing s as an
enlargement or reduction of one object to obtain a similar object by using a scale factor.
Begin with whole number measurements, progressing to rational numbers as students
deepen their understanding.
• Instruction focuses on seeing the scale factor as a constant of proportionality between
corresponding lengths in the scale drawing and the original object. Use manipulatives
such as Geoboards/pegboards, dot paper, c entimeter grid paper, etc. to enlarge and reduce
shapes by simple scale factors (MTR.2. 1) . Discuss whether multiplication or division may
be used, reminding students that division can be represented by multiplication, and
reinforcing that multiplication by a factor between 0 and 1 will be a reduction in size.
o G eoboards
green square has a sc ale factor of 3 from the original red square
o D ot or Grid P aper
green rectangle has a scale factor of 2 from the original red rectangle
• Have students construct scale drawings of the classroom, school, their homes and/or
backyards or other familiar places where they can take measurements ( MTR.7.1 ).
• Instruction includes the understanding that if the scaling factor is 𝑘 , then the constant of
2
proportionality between corresponding areas is 𝑘 . Once students have become
comfortable with scaling dimensions, extend their knowledge to solving problems with
area. Provide several figures where students will determine new dimens ions based on a
given scale factor. Have students then calculate the original and new perimeters, as well
78 | P a g e

===== B1G-M-Grd7-TI · page 79 =====
as the original and new areas. Then analyze/compare the scale factors used in scaling the
perimeters versus the scale factors used for area ( MTR.1.1, MTR.4.1 ).
• Instruction supports flexibility in the variable used for the constant of proportionality.
Common Misconceptions or Errors
• Students may not understand how to read a map. To address this misconception, practice
map reading skills, using familiar areas when possible .
• Students may incorrectly scale area in the same way they scale side length. To address
this misconception, have students calculate areas of similar figures prior to determining
the scale factor between the figures, then make comparisons. Interactive software can
also be used to demonstrate.
• Students may incorrectly set up their proportions.
• Students may believe the scale factor is always greater than 1.
1
o For example, students may respond th e scale factor is 2 when it is .
2
Strategies to Support Tiered Instruction
• Teacher provides instruction utilizing different types of maps to familiarize students with
how to read a map and the key features of a map. Teacher can choose maps that are
familiar to students within their region.
• Instruction includes the use of geometric software to allow students to explore the area of
an original figure verses its scale and draw conclusions on the impact of scale factor.
• Teacher co - creates a graphic organizer with students containing examples of applying a
scale factor to a length or to an area.
• Teacher provides instruction focused on color - coding and labeling the different units
when setting up a proportional relationsh ip to ensure corresponding units are placed in
corresponding positions within the proportion.
• Teacher has students calculate areas of figures where the side lengths of one figure is a
constant multiple of the corresponding side lengths of the other figure prior to
determining the s cale factor between the figures. Students can then make comparisons
between the areas of the figures . Interactive software can also be used to demonstrate.
79 | P a g e

===== B1G-M-Grd7-TI · page 80 =====
Instructional Tasks
Instruction Task 1 (MTR.7.1)
Many supersonic jet aircraft in the past have used triangular wings called delta wings. Below
is a scale drawing of the top of a delta wing.
Scale: 2 c entimeters (cm) in the drawing equals 192 cm on the actual wing.
Part A. What is the length of the actual wing? Explain how you found your answer.
Part B. What is the area of the actual wing? Explain how you found your answer.
Instructional Task 2 (MTR.7.1)
Mariko has an 80:1 scale - drawing of the floor plan of her house. On the floor plan, the
7 1
dimensio ns of her rectangular living room are 1 inches by 2 inches. What is the area of
8 2
her real living room in square feet?
Instructional Items
Instructional Item 1
The triangle below needs to be recreated using the scale factor that produced Figure 2 from
Figure 1. What is this scale factor?
Instructional Item 2
Andrew needs to repaint the side of his building white to prepare for a new mural that will be
painted there. He measured the actual wall to be 26.25 feet long but he cannot easily measure
the height. On his blueprints of the building, the wall measures 3.5 inches long and 4 inches
tall. To determine how much paint to buy, calculate the area of the wall Andrew needs to
cover.
*The strategies, tasks and items included in the B1G - M are examples and should not be considered comprehensive .
MA.7. GR . 2 Solve problems involving three - dimensional figures, including right circular
cylinders .
MA.7.GR.2.1
80 | P a g e

===== B1G-M-Grd7-TI · page 81 =====
Benchmark
Given a mathematical or real - world context, find the surface area of a right
MA.7.GR.2.1
circular cylinder using the figure’s net .
Benchmark Clarifications:
Clarification 1: Instruction focuses on representing a right circular cylinder with its net and on the
connection between surface area of a figure and its net.
Clarification 2: Within this benchmark, the expectation is to find the surface area when given a net or
when given a three - dimensional figure.
Clarification 3: Within this benchmark, the expectation is not to memorize the surface area formula for a
right circular cylinder.
Clarification 4: Solutions may be represented in terms of pi ( 𝜋 ) or approximately.
Connecting Benchmarks/Horizontal Alignment Terms from the K - 12 Glossary
• MA.7.NSO.2 • C ylinder ( C ircular)
• MA.7.GR.1.2 , MA.7.GR.1.3 , • N et
MA.7.GR.1.4 • P i (π)
• S urface A rea
Vertical Alignment
Previous Benchmarks Next Benchmarks
• MA.6.GR.2.2 , MA.6.GR.2.4 • MA.912.GR.4.6
Purpose and Instructional Strategies
In grade 6, students found the area of quadrilaterals and composite figures by decomposing them
into triangles or rectangles, which developed into finding the surface area of right rectangular
prisms and right rectangular pyramids using a figure’s net. In grade 7, students find the area of a
circle as well as the surface area of a right circular cylinder using the figure’s net. I n high school,
students will solve mathematical and real - world problems involving the surface area of
cylinders, pyramids, prisms, cones and spheres.
• Instruction includes problems that make connections to the understanding of a formula
for the surface area of a right circular cylinder and its net (soup can and finding the area
of the paper around the can). Show how different parts of the formula correspond to
different parts of the net ( MTR.7.1 ).
• Instruction allows students the opportunity to develop the formula for the surface area of
a right circular cylinder.
o For example, provide students cans of various sizes, paper, scissors, an d tape
( MTR.2.1 ). Ask students to cover the can completely without overlapping the
paper and only using as little tape as possible. Ask students to explain their
method if they feel it was successful in covering the can completely without
overlapping any paper, until som eone presents the idea of cutting two circles,
taping them to the base and then one rectangle to cover the curved surface
( MTR.4.1 , MTR.5.1 ).
• Instruction allows for students to use various nets for cylinders which they can cut out
and form the three - dimens ional figure or use virtual simulations which show the
“unrolling” of the cylinder into its net ( MTR.2.1 ).
Common Misconceptions or Errors
• Students often confuse the vocabulary base, length, height and “ 𝐵 ” (b ase area), when
moving between two - and three - dimensional figures. To address this misconception,
continue to use the parts of the net to calculate the surface area, rather than focusing on
the formula.
81 | P a g e

===== B1G-M-Grd7-TI · page 82 =====
• Students may incorrectly believe that the part of the cylinder that is lying flat is the base
of the figure. To address this misconception, remind students that while a cylinder may
lay on its side, the bases are the circles with the height being the perpendicular distance
between them. Provide multiple orientations of objects and continue to brea k them down
to their nets.
• Students often forget or confuse the formulas for area, surface area and volume. To
address this misconception, use these concepts in context, or a manner in which they
understand the meaning behind the terms, will be important i n fostering their conceptual
development (MTR.7.1) .
Strategies to Support Tiered Instruction
• Instruction includes the use of geometric software to allow students to explore the
difference between base, length, height and “ 𝐵 ” (base area).
• Instruction includes co - creating a graphic organizer to define the dimensions of
rectangles, circles and right circular cylinder s .
• Teacher provides students with an example of a three - dimensional figure in its original
position then provid es multiple orientations to discuss how the location of the figure’s
base changes, but the dimensions of the figure do not change.
o For example, two right circular cylinders are shown below with the same
dimensions but in different orientations. The base i s highlighted in each.
• Teacher instructs students to draw a visual of a three - dimensional figure and its dimensions
in the context of a real - world problem.
• T eacher directs students to find the exact area of a given circle in terms of pi before
replacing the value of pi with an approximation to determine the estimated area.
• Instruction includes color - coding and labeling the dimensions of rectangles , circles and
right circular cylinder.
• Teacher provides instruction focused on manipulatives or geometric software for students
to understand the difference between the formulas for area, surface area and volume.
• Teacher encourages students to continue to use the parts of the net to calculate the surface
area, rather than focusing on the formula.
• Teacher reminds students that while a cylinder may lay on its side, the bases are the
circles with the height being the perpendicular distance between them. Provide multiple
orientations of objects an d continue to break them down to their nets.
Instructional Tasks
Instructional Task 1 (MTR.7.1)
An ocean resort decided to build a large room in the shape of a cylinder to host events. The
room is 34 feet in diameter with a height of 9 feet. They are going to paint the floor, wall and
ceiling blue to make attendees feel like they are floating in the sky. Determine the surface
area to be painted so they may order the needed supplies.
Instructional Task 2 (MTR.7.1)
82 | P a g e

===== B1G-M-Grd7-TI · page 83 =====
The reviews from several events in the blue room have come in and attendees are reporting
feeling trapped in the enclosed room, rather than floating. So the resort has decided to replace
o
the solid wall with windows for a 360 view of the ocean and surrounding area.
Part A . How many square feet of windows will need to be ordered to do so?
Part B . If the resort decided to make a glass ceiling instead of replacing the curved wall,
how much glass would be needed?
Instructional Items
Instructional Item 1
Determine the surface area of the cylinder below . Round to the nearest tenth. Note: Figure is
not drawn to scale.
5
2 in
8
3
4 in
8
Instructional Item 2
Determine the surface area of the cylinder below. Write your answer as the exact surface
area.
Instructional Item 3
Lyndon is making a nylon case for his new snare drum which measures 14 inches in diameter
and is 6 inches deep. If the case fits snugly around the drum, how much nylon will Lyndon
need?
*The strategies, tasks and items included in the B1G - M are examples and should not be considered comprehensive.
MA.7.GR.2.2
Benchmark
MA.7.GR.2.2 Solve real - world problems involving surface area of right circular cylinders.
Benchmark Clarifications:
Clarification 1: Within this benchmark, the expectation is not to memorize the surface area formula for a
right circular cylinder or to find radius as a missing dimension.
Clarification 2: Solutions may be represented in terms of pi ( 𝜋 ) or approximately.
Connecting Benchmarks/Horizontal Alignment Terms from the K - 12 Glossary
• MA.7.NSO.2 • C ylinder ( C ircular)
• MA.7.GR.1.2 , MA.7.GR.1.3 , • P i ( 𝜋 )
MA.7.GR.1.4 • S urface A rea
Vertical Alignment
83 | P a g e

===== B1G-M-Grd7-TI · page 84 =====
Previous Benchmarks Next Benchmarks
• MA.6.GR.2.2 , MA.6.GR.2.4 • MA.912.GR.4.6
Purpose and Instructional Strategies
In grade 6, students found the area of quadrilaterals and composite figures by decomposing them
into triangles or rectangles, which developed into finding the surface area of right rectangular
prisms and right rectangular pyramids using a figure’s net. In grade 7, students find the surface
area of a right circular cylinder using the figure’s net and build that into solving real - world
problems involving surface area of right circular cylinders. In high school, students will solve
mathematical and real - world problems involving the surface area of cylinders, pyramids, prisms,
cones and spheres.
• Instruction includes finding the height or the circumference (working backwards) when
given the surface area of a right circular cylinder, but students will not be expected to
find the radius as a missing dimension ( MTR.3.1 ).
Common Misconceptions or Errors
• Students often confuse the vocabulary base, length, height and “B” (base area ), when
moving between two - and three - dimensional figures. To address this misconception,
continue to use the parts of the net to calculate the surface area, rather than focusing on
the formula.
• Students may incorrectly believe that whatever is lying flat is the base of the figure. To
address this misconception, remind students that while a cylinder may lay on its side, the
bases are the circles with the height being the perpendicular distance between them.
Provide multiple orientations of objects and continue to break them down to their nets.
Strategies to Support Tiered Instruction
• Instruction includes the use of geometric software to allow students to explore the
difference between base, length, height and “ 𝐵 ” (base area).
• Teacher creates and posts an anchor chart with visual representations of a right circular
cylinder to assist in correct academic vocabulary when solving real - world problems.
• Teacher provides students with an example of a three - dimensional figure in its original
position then provides multiple orientations to discuss how the location of the figure’s
base changes, but the dimensions of the figure do not change.
o For example, two right circular cylinders are shown below with the same
dimensions but in different orientations. The base is highlighted in each.
• Teacher models a visual of a three - dimensional figure and its dimensions in the context
of a real - world problem.
• Instruction includes opportunities for students to solve for the surface area of a given
right circular cylinder in terms of pi before replacing the value of pi with an
approximation to determine the estimated surface area.
• Instruction includes color - coding and labeli ng the dimensions of a right circular cylinder.
84 | P a g e

===== B1G-M-Grd7-TI · page 85 =====
• Teacher provides instruction focused on manipulatives or geometric software for students
to develop understanding of the difference between the formulas for area, surface area
and volume.
• Teacher provides opportunities for students to comprehend the context or situation by
engaging in questions ( laminating these questions on a printed card for students to utilize
as a resource in and out of the classroom would be helpful) .
o What do you know from the problem?
o What is the problem asking you to find?
o Can you create a visual model to help you understand or see patterns in your
problem?
• Teacher encourages students to continue to use the parts of the net to calculate the surface
area, rather than focusing on the formula.
• Teacher reminds students that while a cylinder may lay on its side, the bases are the
circles with the height being the perpendicular distance between them. Provide multiple
orientations of objects and continue to break them down to their nets.
Instructional Tasks
Instructional Task 1 (MTR.4.1)
The Fine Arts Club will be making and selling a soda can snuggie for a fundraiser. They
researched the dimensions of a standard soda can to be 4.83 inches high with a diameter of
2.13 inches across the top and 2.6 inches at the widest part of the can. A so da snuggie that
will keep the soda cold will require an insulated layer, a liner and a decorative outer fabric.
Part A. Provide a design the Fine Arts Club could use to make their soda snuggie. How
much of each material will be needed for each soda snuggi e?
Part B. Compare your design with a partner (or group). What are the similarities? What
changes (if any) would you make to your design based on the ideas of others?
Instructional Items
Instructional Item 1
A cosmetics company is selling a new line of lipstick and needs to determine how much
plastic is needed to wrap each cylindrical tube. If the lipstick tube is 12.1 millimeters ( mm ) in
2
diameter with a length of 72 mm, how many mm of plastic is needed for o ne tube? How
much will be needed for a box of 24?
Instructional Item 2
2
Melanie is buying a candle for a gift. She has 80.07 in of wrapping paper and all of the
candles she is looking at have a radius of 1.5 in. What height candle can Melanie buy if she
uses all of the wrapping paper she has?
*The strategies, tasks and items included in the B1G - M are examples and should not be c onsidered comprehensive.
MA.7.GR.2.3
85 | P a g e

===== B1G-M-Grd7-TI · page 86 =====
Benchmark
Solve mathematical and real - world problems involving volume of right
MA.7.GR.2.3
circular cylinders.
Benchmark Clarifications:
Clarification 1: Within this benchmark, the expectation is not to memorize the volume formula for a right
circular cylinder or to find radius as a missing dimension.
Clarification 2: Solutions may be represented in terms of pi ( 𝜋 ) or approximately.
Connecting Benchmarks/Horizontal Alignment Terms from the K - 12 Glossary
• MA.7.NSO.2 • C ylinder ( C ircular)
• MA.7.GR. 1.4 • P i (π)
• V olume
Vertical Alignment
Previous Benchmarks Next Benchmarks
• MA.6.GR.2.3 • MA.912.GR.4.5
Purpose and Instructional Strategies
Students progress through solving problems involving volumes with a focus of right rectangular
prisms in grade 6, right circular cylinders in grade 7 and cylinders, pyramids, prisms, cones and
spheres in high school.
• Instruction builds on students ’ knowledge of fi nding the volume of a rectangular prism,
which also includes the area of the base multiplied by the height. Ask students to make
conjectures about how to calculate the volume of a right circular cylinder. Provide the
radius and height of several cylinders for students to verify or revise their conjecture
( MTR.6.1 ).
• Instruction includes physical or virtual representations for the volume of a right circular
cylinder ( MTR.2.1 ).
o For example, stack quarters one at a time to show repeated addition (the height)
on the area of the base (the first quarter used).
• Instruction focuses on real - world situations to reinforce conceptual understanding of
volume versus surface area ( MTR.7.1 ).
Common Misconceptions or Errors
• Students often confuse the vocabulary base, length, height and “B” (b ase area), when
moving between two - and three - dimensional figures. To address this misconception,
continue to use the parts of the net to calculate the surface area, rather than focusing on
the formula.
• Students ma y incorrectly believe that whatever is lying flat is the base of the figure. To
address this misconception, remind students that while a cylinder may lay on its side, the
bases are the circles with the height being the perpendicular distance between them.
Provide multiple orientations of objects and continue to break them down to their nets.
• Students may incorrectly apply the formulas for area, surface area and volume.
Strategies to Support Tiered Instruction
• Instruction includes the use of geometric software to allow students to explore the
difference between base, length, height, and “ 𝐵 ” (base area).
• Teacher creates and posts an anchor chart with visual representations of a right circular
cylinder to assist in correct academic vocabulary w hen solving real - world problems.
86 | P a g e

===== B1G-M-Grd7-TI · page 87 =====
• Teacher provides students with an example of a three - dimensional figure in its original
position then provides multiple orientations to discuss how the location of the figure’s
base changes, but the dimensions of the figure do not change.
o For example, tw o right circular cylinders are shown below with the same
dimensions but in different orientations. The base is highlighted in each.
• Teacher instructs students to draw a visual of a three - dimensional figure and its
dimensions in the context of a real - w orld problem.
• Instruction includes opportunities for students to solve for the volume of a given right
circular cylinder in terms of pi before replacing the value of pi with an approximation to
determine the estimated volume.
• Instruction includes co - constr ucting a graphic organizer of a right circular cylinder and
color - coding and labeling the dimensions .
• Teacher provides instruction focused on manipulatives or geometric software for students
to develop understanding of the difference between the formulas for area, surface area
and volume.
• Teacher provides opportunities for students to comprehend the conte xt or situation by
engaging in questions ( laminating these questions on a printed card for students to utilize
as a resource in and out of the classroom would be helpful) .
o What do you know from the problem?
o What is the problem asking you to find?
o Can you create a visual model to help you understand or see patterns in your
problem?
• Teacher encourages students to continue to use the parts of the net to calculate the surface
area, rather than focusing on the fo rmula.
• Teacher reminds students that while a cylinder may lay on its side, the bases are the
circles with the height being the perpendicular distance between them. Provide multiple
orientations of objects and continue to break them down to their nets.
Instructional Tasks
Instructional Task 1 (MTR.1.1)
Coffee2Go wants to build a record breaking giant coffee cup for a promotional celebration at
a convention for coffee drinkers. In 2020, the Guinness Book of World Records reported that
the World’s Largest Cup of Coffee contained 2,010 gallons of fresh - brewed coffee brewed.
Part A. What questions would need to be answ ered to approach this problem? Do you
have all the information you need to solve the problem? Why or why not?
Part B. The Guinness Book of World Records, in 2020, documented the Largest Coffee
Cup with a height of 8 feet and a diameter of 8 feet. How many cubic feet of
coffee can be held in the World’s Largest Coffee Cup?
Part C. There are approximately 1.25 gall ons of c offee in a cubic foot. If Coffee2Go has a
goal of creating a coffee cup that holds 2,410 gallons of coffee, what could be the
height and diameter of the coffee cup if they are the same size?
87 | P a g e

===== B1G-M-Grd7-TI · page 88 =====
Instructional Task 2 (MTR.7.1)
Karim is setting up an inflatable pool in the yard for the little kids to play. The pool measures
1
3 feet across and 16 inches deep. What is the volume of water needed to fill the pool all the
2
way to the top?
Instructional Items
Instructional Item 1
3
What is the height of a cylinder, with a radius of 3.4 m eters (m) , whose volume is 198 m ?
Round to the nearest hundredth.
Instructional Item 2
Determine the exact volume of each of the following cylinders.
5
2 in
8
3
4 in
8
Instructional Item 3
3
A candle mold has 24π in of space in which wax can be poured to make a candle. If the
radius of the mold is 2 inches ( in ) , what is its height?
*The strategies, tasks and items included in the B1G - M are examples and should not be considered comprehensive.
88 | P a g e

===== B1G-M-Grd7-TI · page 89 =====
Data Analysis & Probability
MA.7. DP .1 Represent and interpret numerical and categorical data .
MA.7.DP.1.1
Benchmark
Determine an appropriate measure of center or measure of variation to
MA.7.DP.1.1 summarize numerical data, represented numerically or graphically, taking into
consideratio n the context and any outliers.
Benchmark Clarifications:
Clarification 1: Instruction includes recognizing whether a measure of center or measure of variation is
appropriate and can be justified based on the given context or the statistical purpose.
Clarification 2: Graphical representations are limited to histograms, line plots, box plots and stem - and -
leaf plots.
Clarification 3: The measure of center is limited to mean and median. The measure of variation is limited
to range and interquartile range.
Connecting Benchmarks/Horizontal Alignment Terms from the K - 12 Glossary
• MA.7. NSO.2.2 , MA.7. NSO.2.3 • B ox P lot
• D ata
• H istogram
• I nterquartile R ange (IQR)
• L ine P lot
• M ean
• M easures of C enter
• M easures of V ariability
• M edian
• O utlier
• Q uartiles
• R ange (of data set)
• S tem - and - L eaf P lot
Vertical Alignment
Previous Benchmarks Next Benchmarks
• MA.6.DP.1.2 , MA.6.DP.1.6 • MA.8.DP.1.1
• MA.912.DP.1.1
Purpose and Instructional Strategies
In grade 6, students found and interpreted mean, median, mode and range , as well as determined
and described how changes in data values impacted measures of center and variation. In grade 7,
students determine an appropriate measure of center or measure of variation to summarize
numerical data, taking into consideration the co ntext and any outliers. Instruction builds on
student knowledge from MA.6.DP.1.6. In grade 8, students will be introduced to numerical
bivariate data and will depict it with line graphs and lines of fit. In high school, students will
select an appropriate method to represent both univariate and bivariate numerical data, and
interpret the different components in the display.
89 | P a g e

===== B1G-M-Grd7-TI · page 90 =====
• The difference between range and interquartile range is just as important as, and very
similar to, the difference between mean and median. In both cases, the difference has to
do with whether or not one thinks outliers should be ignored ( MTR.1.1 , MTR.6.1 ).
o Outliers should be mostly ignored if a researcher is more interested in only the
“typical” members of a population, as might be the case in politics or advertising .
In these cases, the median is often the best choice as a measure of center, and the
IQR is often the best choice as a measure of variation. These measures are little
affected by out liers.
o Outliers should not be ignored if a researcher is concerned about the risks
associated with “extreme” cases or concerned with the effects that outliers have
on the average, as is the case in the insuranc e industry or in medical trials. In
these cas es, the mean is often a better choice than the median as a measure of
center, and the range is better than the IQR as a measure of variation.
o All four of these measures are widely used in data analysis.
• Instruction focuses on identifying outliers qualitat ively rather than quantitatively. T o
determine quantitatively if a data point is an outlier, a teacher may use the following
definition. A data value is considered to be an outlier if it lies 1.5 times the IQR below
( ) ( )
Q1, ( Q1 − 1 . 5 ∙ IQR ) , or above Q3, ( Q3 + 1 . 5 ∙ IQR ) .
o For example, the table below showcases a five - number summary of a data set.
Minimum Q1 Median Q3 Maximum
29 37 43 49 82
Within the data set, the IQR is 12. To calculate if a value is an outlier, start with
finding 1 . 5 ∙ 12 , which is 18. From there, a data value is considered an outlier if it
is less than 37 − 18 , or 19. It is also considered an outlier if it is greater than
49 + 18 , or 67.
The maximum value in this data set is an outlier within the data set, though there
could be additional values when you see the entire data set.
• Instruction includes cases where students are able to gather their own data for analysis
( MTR.7.1 ).
• Instruction includes activities that require students to match graphs and explanations, or
measures of center /variation and explanations prior to interpreting graphs based upon the
appropriate measures of center or spread calculated ( MTR.2.1 , MTR.4.1 ).
Common Misconceptions or Errors
• Some students may incorrectly calculate the measures of center and variation.
• Students may incorrectly believe all graph ical displays are symmetrical. To address this
misconception, students should use graphs of various shapes, including those with
outli ers, which will show this to be false. Start with small data sets related to familiar
contexts to discuss how the data should be represented and to show how extreme values
can alter the measures.
• Students may incorrectly identify data points as outliers.
90 | P a g e

===== B1G-M-Grd7-TI · page 91 =====
Strategies to Support Tiered Instruction
• Instruction includes opportunities for students to calculate the measures of center or the
measures of variation for the initial and the changed data sets before comparing the
impact of an outlier or an additional data point.
• Teacher provides examples of several visual displays or graphs to discuss the shapes of
each one. Opportunities should be provided for students to see the various shapes with
and without outliers so they can see that not all graphica l displays are symmetrical.
• Teacher provides instruction on the definition of an outlier and interpretation on when to
consider outliers (refer to the Instructional Strategies). Teacher provides examples of how
outliers can be displayed within different types of data displays .
• Instruction includes co - creating a graphic organizer for measures of center and measures
of variation and including the generalized impact of outliers on each.
o For example:
Front of Folded Paper Inside of Folded Paper
Calculation: Example:
The arithmetic average of a [Provide data set
set of numbers found by with an outlier and
dividing the sum of all calculatio ns with and
values by the number of without the outlier]
values.
Mean
Useful When:
The data does not contain
an outlier or the influence
of the outlier needs to be
shown.
Calculation: Example:
The middle of an ordered [Provide data set
list of values. If the list has with an outlier and
an odd number of values, it calculatio ns with and
Measures of Center
is the middle value of that without the outlier]
list. If the list has an even
number of values, it is the
Median
mean of the two middle
values.
Useful When:
The data has an outlier and
the influence of the outlier
needs to be ignored.
91 | P a g e

===== B1G-M-Grd7-TI · page 92 =====
Instructional Tasks
Instructional Task 1 (MTR.7.1)
Teacher Background Information
Unlike many elections for public office where a person is elected strictly based on the results
of a popular vote (i.e., the candidate who earns the most votes in the election wins), in the
United States, the election for President of the United States is determined by a process
called the Electoral College. According to the National Archives, the process was established
in the United States Constitution “ as a compromise between election of the President by a
vote in Congress and election of the President b y a popu lar vote of qualified citizens.”
( Archives - electoral college accessed July 1, 2021 ).
Each state receives an allocation of electoral votes in the process, and this allocation is
determined by the number of members in the state’ s delegation to the U . S . Congress. This
number is the sum of the number of U . S . Senators that represent the state (always 2, per the
Const itution) and the number of Representatives that represent the state in the U . S . House of
Representatives (a number that i s directly related to the state’ s population of qualified
citizens as determined by the US Census ). Therefore the larger a state’ s popu lation of
qualified citizens, the more electoral votes it has. Note: the District of Columbia (which is
not a state) is granted 3 electoral votes in the process through the 23rd Amendment to the
Constitution.
Task
The following table shows the allocation of electoral votes for each state and the District of
Columbia for the 2012, 2016 and 2020 presidential elections. ( Archives - electoral college
accessed July 1, 2021 ).
Part A . Which state has the most electoral votes? How many votes does it have?
Part B. Based on the given information, which state has the second highest population of
qualified citizens?
Par t C. Here is a line plot of the distribution.
a. What is the shape of this dis tribution: symmetric or skewed?
92 | P a g e

===== B1G-M-Grd7-TI · page 93 =====
b. Imagine that someone you are speaking with is unfamiliar with these
shape terms. Describe clearly and in the context of this data set what the
shap e description you have chosen means in terms of the distribution.
Part D. Does the line plot lead you to think that any states are outliers in terms of their
number of electoral votes? Explain your reasoning, and if you do believe that
there are outlier values, identify the corresponding states.
Part E. What measure of center ( mean or median) would you recommend for describing
this data set? Why did you choose this measure?
Part F. Determine the value of the median for this data set (electoral votes).
Instructional Items
Instructional Item 1
The household incomes of 15 families in a local neighborhood was recorded to the nearest
$1 , 000 in the table below.
$32,000 $47,000 $47,000 $36,000 $35,000
$48,000 $35,000 $32,000 $48,000 $34,000
$50,000 $36,000 $42,000 $35,000 $42,000
Determine the most appropriate measure of center to describe this data set. What is the value
of that measure?
Instructional Item 2
The household incomes of 15 families in a local neighborhood was recorded to the nearest
$1 , 000 in the table below.
$32,000 $47,000 $47,000 $36,000 $35,000
$48,000 $35,000 $32,000 $48,000 $34,000
$50,000 $36,000 $42,000 $35,000 $42,000
At the end of the month, a new family is moving in whose household income is $475,000.
Determine the most appropriate measure of center to describe this data set. What is the value
of that measure? Justify your choice .
*The strategies, tasks and items included in the B1G - M are examples and should not be considered comprehensive.
93 | P a g e

===== B1G-M-Grd7-TI · page 94 =====
MA.7.DP.1.2
Benchmark
Given two numerical or graphical representations of data, use the measure(s)
MA.7.DP.1.2 of center and measure(s) of variability to make comparisons, interpret results
and draw conclus ions about the two populations.
Benchmark Clarifications:
Clarification 1: Graphical representations are limited to histograms, line plots, box plots and stem - and -
leaf plots.
Clarification 2: The measure of center is limited to mean and median. The measure of variation is limited
to range and interquartile range.
Connecting Benchmarks/H orizontal Alignment Terms from the K - 12 Glossary
• MA.7. NSO.2. 2 • B ox P lot
• MA.7.NSO.2.3 • D ata
• H istogram
• I nterquartile R ange (IQR)
• L ine P lot
• M ean
• M easures of C enter
• M easures of V ariability
• M edian
• R ange (of data set)
• S tem - and - L eaf P lot
Vertical Alignment
Previous Benchmarks Next Benchmarks
• MA.6.DP.1.2 • MA.8.DP.1.1
Purpose and Instructional Strategies
In grade 6, students calculated and interpreted mean, median, mode and range, while in grade 7,
they use those calculations to make comparisons, interpret results and draw conclusions about
two populations. In grade 8, students will learn how to interpret the main features of line graphs
and lines of fit.
• Instruction includes cases where students need to calculate measures of center and
variation in order to interpret them .
• Instruction includes having students collect their own data for analysis. Student interest in
making comparisons assists with students making sense of the data to interpret
comparisons ( MTR.1.1 , MTR.7.1 ).
• Students should not be expected to classify differences between data sets as “significant ”
or “not significant.”
• Data representations can be shown as a two - sided stem - and - leaf plot and multiple box
plots on the same scale.
• Data representations should include titles, labels and a key as appropriate.
Common Misconceptions or Errors
• Some students may incorrectly believe a histogram with greater variability in the heights
of the bars indicates greater variability of the data set.
94 | P a g e

===== B1G-M-Grd7-TI · page 95 =====
• Students may not recognize when to use a stem - and - leaf plot or may not be able to read a
two - sided stem - an d - leaf plot.
• Students may not be able to explain their choice of the most appropriate measures of
center and variability based on the given data.
• Students may think that the presence of one or more outliers leads to an automatic choice
(median, IQR) for the measures of center and variation.
Strategies to Support Tiered Instruction
• Instruction includes explaining the difference between variability in the heights of the
bars of histograms, and the actual variability of the data set.
• Teacher provides instruct ion on how to use different type of data displays to show two
sets of data at the same time. Teachers co - construct an anchor chart explainin g the
different parts of each display with explanations on when and how to use each of them .
o For example, teacher can provide students with a two - sided stem - and - leaf plot
with the “stem” in the middle and “leaves” on either side, each displaying the two
data sets.
Data Set A Data Set B
1, 2, 3 0
4, 5, 5, 8 1
Key: 1|0 = 1.0
5, 8, 9 2 2, 4, 8
3 0, 0, 0, 6, 9
4 3, 4, 9
o For example, teacher can provide students with two line plots or two box plots on
the same number line. Plots can be given in different colors to show the different
data sets.
• Teacher provides instruction on which measure of center and variation should be used,
making sure to include what to do when an outlier is present.
• Teacher facilitates discussion on the different measures of center and variability and how
to know when to use each one. Use a graphic organizer to compare the different measures
of cent er and variability to assist students in deciding when to use them.
• Instruction includes co - creating an anchor chart with different data displays containing
visual representations and explanations of when and how to use them.
Instructional Tasks
Instructional Task 1 (MTR.1.1, MTR.7.1)
A group of students in the book club are debating whether high school juniors or seniors
spend more time on homework. A random sampling of juniors and seniors at the local high
school were surveyed about the average amount of time they spent per night on homework.
The results are listed in the table below.
Average Amount of Time on Homework Per Night (in minutes)
Juniors 125 90 95 80 100 100 120 85 95 120 95 85
Seniors 135 70 65 100 35 175 80 80 90 65 120 60
Part A. Calculate and compare the measures of center for the data sets.
Part B. Calculate and compare the variability in each distribution.
Part C. Does the data support juniors or seniors spending more time on homework?
Explain your reasoning.
Instructional Items
95 | P a g e

===== B1G-M-Grd7-TI · page 96 =====
Instructional Item 1
High schools around the state of Florida were asked what percentage of students in their
graduating class would be attending a state college and what percentage would be attending a
community college. The results are provided in the graph below.
Key:
1|1=1 1%
Is a student more likely to go to a state or community college? Which choice has more
variability?
*The strategies, tasks and items included in the B1G - M are examples and should not be considered comprehensive.
MA.7.DP.1.3
Benchmark
Given categorical data from a random sample, use proportional relationships to
MA.7.DP.1.3
make predictions about a population.
Example: O’Neill’s Pillow Store made 600 pillows yesterday and found that 6 were defective. If
they plan to make 4,300 pillows this week, predict approximately how many pillows
will be defective.
Example: A school district polled 400 people to determine if it was a good idea to not have school
on Friday. 30% of people responded that it was not a good idea to have school on
Friday. Predict the approximate percentage of people who think it would be a good idea
to have school on Friday from a population of 6,228 peop le.
Connecting Benchmarks/Horizontal Alignment Terms from the K - 12 Glossary
• MA.7.NSO.2. 2, MA.7. NSO.2.3 • C ategorical D ata
• MA.7.AR.3.2 • P opulation (in D ata A nalysis)
• MA.7.AR.4.5 • P roportional R elationships
• R andom S ampling
Vertical Alignment
Previous Benchmarks Next Benchmarks
• MA.6.AR.3.4 • MA.8.DP.1.1
• MA.6.DP.1. 3, MA.6.DP.1.4 • MA.912.DP.1.4
Purpose and Instructional Strategies
In grade 6, students described data using measures of center and variation. In grade 7, students
use samples to compare measures of center and variation in data sets, as well as use samples to
make a generalization about the population from which the sampl e was taken. In grade 8,
students will use bivariate data to study proportional and linear relationships and make
96 | P a g e

===== B1G-M-Grd7-TI · page 97 =====
predictions with lines of fit. In high school, students will estimate a population total, mean or
percentage using data from a sample survey and develop a margin of error through the use of
simulation.
• Instruction includes helping students understand that since there is always variability in
collecti ng samples. T hese generalizations, or predictions, can only be estimates of what
we expec t to see from the greater population.
• Use real - world scenarios to explain that random sampling is needed when we need to find
information about a population that is too large or too difficult to measure completely
( MTR.7.1 ).
o As in the second benchmark ex ample, the school district polled 400 people
because it would be difficult, and perhaps costly, to poll all 6,228 people
efficiently. Therefore, we can analyze a sample that is representative of the
population to get an idea of what may be happening with t he larger group.
• Students have done more precise work with proportional relationships in MA.7.AR.4, but
here we will use the same proportional reasoning to make predictions, or find estimates,
of what may be happening in a population that is to large or cu mbersome for us to
measure completely.
• Instruction includes having students make predictions about what the population
measures will be, based on the sample ( MTR.6.1 ) .
• Instruction uses manipulatives or simulations to have students collect their own set of
data ( MTR.2.1 ).
• As in the first benchmark example for defective pillows, students can pull a random
sample from a bag of chips that have been strategically marked D for defective or have
no marking for no defects. They can use their proportion of defective chips to predic t
how many might be in the entire bag. Comparisons can be made across the different
groups in the room to see how close the estimates were to the actual values ( MTR.4.1 ).
Common Misconceptions or Errors
• Students may mistake part to total as part to part, which would give an incorrect ratio
when setting up their proportion. To address this misconception, use percentages or
counts out of 100 to help illustrate this more clearly.
• Students may not understand what random sampling is or why it is important. To address
this misconception, allow students to collect random samples and make comparisons
across groups to show they are not exact, but representative, of the larger population.
97 | P a g e

===== B1G-M-Grd7-TI · page 98 =====
Strategies to Support Tiered Instruction
• Teacher provides instruction focused on color - coding and labeling the different
categories based on the sample and the population when setting up a proportional
relationship to ensure corresponding parts are placed in the corresponding positions
within the proportion.
o For example, based on a random sample of 150 people , 23 people stated that they
preferred to go grocery shopping on Saturday morning. If ones wants to make a
prediction on how many people, out of a town of 4500 people , who prefer to go
shopping on Saturday morning, th e proportion below can be used.
23 𝑆𝑎𝑡𝑢𝑟𝑑𝑎𝑦 𝑠 ℎ 𝑜𝑝𝑝𝑒𝑟𝑠 𝑥 𝑆𝑎𝑡𝑢𝑟 𝑑 𝑎𝑦 𝑠 ℎ 𝑜𝑝𝑝𝑒𝑟𝑠
=
150 𝑠 ℎ 𝑜𝑝𝑝𝑒𝑟𝑠 4500 𝑠 ℎ 𝑜𝑝𝑝𝑒𝑟𝑠
Students can also make the connection to multiplicative relationships between
shoppers and Saturday shoppers as shown below.
× 30
23 𝑆𝑎𝑡𝑢𝑟𝑑𝑎𝑦 𝑠 ℎ 𝑜𝑝𝑝𝑒𝑟𝑠 𝑥 𝑆𝑎𝑡𝑢𝑟𝑑𝑎𝑦 𝑠 ℎ 𝑜𝑝𝑝𝑒𝑟𝑠
=
150 𝑠 ℎ 𝑜𝑝𝑝𝑒𝑟𝑠 4500 𝑠 ℎ 𝑜𝑝𝑝𝑒𝑟𝑠
× 30
• Teacher uses percentages to help illustrate the difference between part to part and part to
total more clearly. Use percentages or counts out of 100 to help illustrate this more
clearly.
• Instruction includes providing students with an example of random sam pling and biased
sampling in a context that is relevant to students.
o For example, Branden at Sunshine Middle School want s to predict if pizza should
be served at the Fall Festival and Johnny suggests sampling 20 students in his 7 th
grade class. Amanda su ggests it would be better sampling 20 random students
from all grade levels at Sunshine Middle School. Since Branden wants to ensure
that the sampling is not biased, he chooses Amanda’s plan since the prediction is
for the whole school and not just for one class at the school.
• Instruction includes the use of problems with percentages or counts of 100.
o For e xample, Mr. Smith surveyed stu dents at his school last year which candy bar
they preferred. His results are shown in the pie chart below. Students can discuss
how he can use this information to make a prediction about how many students
prefer a certain candy bar this school year.
Reese's Kit Kat M&Ms Skittles
Skittles
10%
M&Ms
14% Reese s '
43%
Kit Kat
33%
• Teacher allows students to collect random samples and make comparisons across groups
98 | P a g e

===== B1G-M-Grd7-TI · page 99 =====
to show they are not exact, but representative, of the larger population.
Instructional Tasks
Instructional Task 1 (MTR.4.1, MTR.5.1)
A random sample of the 1,200 students at Moorsville Middle School was asked which type
of movie they prefer. The results are compiled in the table below:
Action Comedy Historical Horror Mystery Science Fiction
15 12 3 10 4 6
Part A. Use the data to estimate the total number of students at Moorsville Middle school
who prefer horror movies.
Part B. Use the data to estimate the total number of students at Moorsville Middle school
who prefer either mystery or science fiction movies.
Part C. Suppose another random sample of students was drawn. Would you expect the
results to be the same? Explain why or why not.
Instructional Task 2 (MTR.4.1, MTR.7.1)
A constitutional amendment is on the ballot in Florida, and it needs at least 60% of the vote
to pass. The editor of a local newspaper wants to publish a prediction of whether or not the
amendment will pass. She hires ten pollsters to each ask 100 randomly selected voters if they
will vote yes.
Should the newspaper’s prediction be that the amendment will pass or that it will not pass ?
Explain your reasoning.
Instructional Items
Instructional Item 1
A research group is trying to determine how many alligators are in a particular area. They
tagged 30 alligators and released them. Later, they counted 12 alligators who were tagged out
of the 150 they saw. What can the research group estimate is the total population of alligators
in that area?
Instructi onal Item 2
The local grocery store is going to donate milk and cookies to an upcoming middle school
event. They surveyed 150 students in the school to determine which type of milk they prefer
and recorded the results below.
Cow’s Milk Soy Milk Almond Milk
82 25 43
If there are 950 students in the school, how much soy milk should the store plan to donate?
*The strategies, tasks and items included in the B1G - M are examples and should not be considered comprehensive.
MA.7.DP.1.4
Benchmark
99 | P a g e

===== B1G-M-Grd7-TI · page 100 =====
Use proportional reasoning to construct, display and interpret data in circle
MA.7.DP.1.4
gra phs.
Benchmark Clarifications:
Clarification 1: Data is limited to no more than 6 categories.
Connecting Benchmarks/Horizontal Alignment Terms from the K - 12 Glossary
• MA.7.NSO.1.2 • C ircle G raph
• MA.7.AR.3.2 • D ata
• MA.7.AR.4.5 • P roportional R elationships
Vertical Alignment
Previous Benchmarks Next Benchmarks
• MA.6.AR.3.4 • MA.912.DP.1.1 , MA.912.DP.1.2
Purpose and Instructional Strategies
In grade 6, students worked with solving problems using ratio relationships. In grade 7, students
apply their knowledge of ratios to solve problems involving proportions, including using
proportional reasoning to construct, display and interpret categorica l data in circle graphs. In
high school, students will select an appropriate method to represent data, depending on whether
it is numerical or categorical data and on whether it is univariate or bivariate.
• Circle graphs can be used to show how categories represent part of a whole, or
compositions. Totals are represented as percentages totaling 100%, which illustrates the
percentage breakdown of items and visually represents a comparison. Circle graphs not
effective, however, when there are too m any categories.
• Students should be able to identify strengths and limitations in showcasing data within a
circle graph.
Strengths Limitations
• Compares parts to a whole • Graph does not show total populations
and to each other
• Totals require additional information
• Each response is shown as that is often not represented in the graph
a percent • Difficult to draw by hand, need tools or
• Size of sectors compare software for accurate depictions
results
• Instruction begins with data sets out of 100 to allow for easier calculations of
percentages.
• Students should brainstorm how they might split up their circle into the needed
percentages ( MTR.5.1 ).
o For example, students can slice a circle into 4 equal parts to show students the 4
o
right angles at the center which total 360 . Then emphasize using proportional
relationships to determine the central angle sizes needed based on the percentage
size of each “slice” of the circle.
• Students should collect their own data with which to create a circle graph ( MTR.7.1 ).
o For example, have students count colored candy/snacks or survey other students
in the room about their favorite color, favorite sport or favorite genre of
music/movies.
• Use protractors or online software to assist in creating circle graphs accu rately.
Common Misconceptions or Errors
100 | P a g e

===== B1G-M-Grd7-TI · page 101 =====
• Students may incorrectly use the percent of a category for the central angle degrees
instead of finding the degrees by using a proportion.
• Students may incorrectly round or make other errors in calculations that will lead to the
circle graph sections not totaling 100%.
Strategies to Support Tiered Instruction
• Teacher models several examples to work through with students, showing how to set up
the proportion to find the central angle degrees, referencing patterns for students to
discuss.
o For example, if students need to determine the angle measure that corresponds to
2 1 %, the proportion below can be used.
21 𝑥
=
100 360
• Teacher models and works through several problems while discussing aloud how to
properly round w hen having to total to 100%, reinforcing to students to work through the
problems carefully as to not make computation errors.
• Teacher models using computer - based software to create circle graphs to verify how to
pr operly round.
• Teacher provides students with fill in the blank examples working from percent of a
category using proportions to find the central angle degrees.
• Teacher provides several completed examples of problems where rounding was needed
for students t o reference while working through multiple problems together.
• For students incorrectly using a protractor, provide students with a circle and allow them
to measure sections then find the percent.
• Teacher models using fraction circle manipulatives to suppo rt converting fractions to
percentages.
Instructional Tasks
Instructional Task 1 (MTR.4.1, MTR.7.1)
A group of friends has been given $800 to host a party. They must decide how much money
will be spent on food, drinks, paper products, music and decorations.
Part A. As a group, develop two options for the friends to choose from regarding how to
spend the ir money. Decide how much to spend in each area and create a circle
graph for each option to represent your choices.
Part B. Mikel presented the circle graph below with his recommendations on how to
spend the money. How much did he choose to spend on food and drinks? How
much did he choose to spend on music?
101 | P a g e

===== B1G-M-Grd7-TI · page 102 =====
Instructional Items
Instructional Item 1
Circle Point High School surveyed its students to determine which mode of transportation
they use to get to and from school. Create and label a circle graph based on the results given
below.
Mode of Transportation Walk/ Bicycle Drive Parent Pickup Bus
Number of Students 96 224 86 694
*The strategies, tasks and items included in the B1G - M are examples and should not be considered comprehensive.
MA.7.DP.1.5
Benchmark
Given a real - world numerical or categorical data set, choose and create an
MA.7.DP.1.5
appropriate graphical representation.
Benchmark Clarifications:
Clarification 1: Graphical representations are limited to histograms, bar charts, circle graphs, line plots,
box plots and stem - and - leaf plots.
Connecting Benchmarks/Horizontal Alignment Terms from the K - 12 Glossary
• MA.7.NSO.1.2 • B ar G raph
• MA.7.AR.3. 1 • B ox P lot
• C ategorical D ata
• C ircle G raph
• H istogram
• L ine P lot
• S tem - and - L eaf P lot
Vertical Alignment
Previous Benchmarks Next Benchmark s
• MA.6.DP.1.5 • MA.8.DP.1.1
Purpose and Instructional Strategies
In grade 6, students created box plots and histograms to represent numerical data. In grade 7,
students must choose and create an appropriate graphical representation for a given numerical or
102 | P a g e

===== B1G-M-Grd7-TI · page 103 =====
categorical data set. In grade 8, students will construct a scat ter plot or a line graph for a given
set of bivariate numerical data.
• Students were introduced to bar charts (bar graphs) in grade 3, students may need to be
reintroduced to this graphical representation.
• Graphical representations of categorical data sets are helpful for showing trends that can
be analyzed and making comparisons of categories, among different items, or items over
time periods. They visually show the mode of the data and, at a quick glance, show
categories in a set of d ata that dominate others. Depending on the graphical
representation chosen, either the frequency ( number of items) or relative frequency
(percentage) for each category can be illustrated.
• Histograms (for numerical data) and box plots (for categorical data) work well in
grouping large sets of data to be easily compared, but do not allow viewers access to each
individual data point if needed for other calculations such as the mean.
• Circle graphs are not ideal when too many categories are included as it is dif ficult to
distinguish the difference in sizes of the sectors. Bar graph (or bar charts) make a similar
comparison but the heights of the bars make the comparison more easily distinguishable.
• Stem - and - leaf plots and line plots are useful in displaying the s hape of a numerical data
set, easily identifying the mode and outliers, and they contain all of the values in the data
set allowing for additional calculations such as the mean. They are not ideal when there is
a large volume of data since it is time consu ming to create and becomes difficult to read
or interpret.
Common Misconceptions or Errors
• Students may not distinguish between histograms (numerical data) and bar charts , also
called bar graphs (categorical data) .
Strategies to Support Tiered Instruction
• Instruction includes displaying histograms and bar charts side by side and allow students
to compare and contrast each one to help them understand the difference between the
two, and what information we can learn from each one.
• Teacher provides a graphic organizer for each type of data display for students to
reference in the future.
• Teacher co - creates examples of both bar graphs and histograms with stu dents, explaining
step - by - step how to create them and how/why they are different.
103 | P a g e

===== B1G-M-Grd7-TI · page 104 =====
Instructional Tasks
Instructional Task 1 (MTR.2.1)
The following data shows the grams of protein in 21 protein bars.
{ 12 , 14 , 11 , 8 , 10 , 8 , 14 , 8 , 8 , 12 , 10 , 12 , 15 , 11 , 15 , 20 , 10 , 15 , 12 , 21 , 20 }
Part A. Create two different graphical representations of the data using histograms, bar
charts, circle graphs, line plots, box plots or stem - and - leaf plots.
Part B. Compare an d contrast the two displays and determine which is more appropriate.
Explain your reasoning.
Instructional Items
Instructional Item 1
Select an appropriate type of display for each of the following situations.
• the salaries of all 40 employees at a small company
• the salaries of all 250 people at a mid - sized company
• the distribution of colors in a bag of colored candies
• the number of siblings students in the 7 th grade class have
*The strategies, tasks and items included in the B1G - M are examples and should not be considered comprehensive.
MA.7. DP . 2 Develop an understanding of probability. Find and compare experimental and
theoretical probabilities .
MA.7.DP.2.1
Benchmark
MA.7.DP.2.1 Determine the sample space for a simple experiment.
Benchmark Clarifications:
Clarification 1: Simple experiments include tossing a fair coin, rolling a fair die, picking a card randomly
from a deck, picking marbles randomly from a bag and spinning a fair spinner.
Connecting Benchmarks/Horizontal Alignment Terms from the K - 12 Glossary
• MA.7.NSO.2.2 • E vent
• S ample S pace
Vertical Alignment
Previous Benchmarks Next Benchmarks
• MA.8.DP.2.1 , MA.8.DP.2.2 ,
MA.8.DP.2.3
104 | P a g e

===== B1G-M-Grd7-TI · page 105 =====
Purpose and Instructional Strategies
In grade 7, students determine the sample space for a simple experiment , and in grade 8 , they
will find the sample space for a repeated experiment.
• For mastery of this benchmark, an experiment is an action that can have more than one
outcome. Experiments tend to have randomness, or uncertainty, in their outcomes.
o For example, an experiment can be the action of tossing a coin. Possible outcomes
would b e whether the coin lands on head s or lands on tails.
• For mastery of this benchmark, simple experiments are restricted to those listed in
Clarification 1 .
o Tossing a coin
Coins are not limited to those with heads or tails.
o Rolling a die
Dice are not limited to 6 - sided dice.
o Picking a card from a deck
Card decks are not limited to a standard 52 - card deck.
o Picking a marble from a bag
Picking a marble from a bag is not limited to colors . Picking a tile, slip of paper or
other objects from a bag are acceptable for this benchmark.
o Spinning a spinner
Spinning a spinner is not limited to colors.
• Students should experience experiments before discussing the theoretical concept of
probability.
• Students should informally explore t he idea of lik elihood, fairness and chance while
building the meaning of a probability value. In this benchmark, all experiments are fair,
meaning that all of the individual outcomes are equally likely.
o For example , if the experiment is to draw a marble from a bag, then each marble
is equally likely to be chosen.
• Have students practice making models to represent sample spaces to gain understanding
on how probabilities are determined. Use familiar tools, including virtual manipulatives
such as a coin, fair die, d eck of cards and fair spinner (MTR.2.1) .
• For simple experiments, a sample space will typically be represented by a list of
outcomes, such as Heads, Tails or by a written description , such as “The sides of a 20 -
sided die.” Providing opportunities for students to match situations and sample spaces
will assist with building their ability to visualize the sample space for any given
experiment.
o For example, the experiment of drawing a marble from a bad containing 2 red
marbles and 1 blue marble has the sample space that can be written as {red, red,
blue} or as {r, r, b}.
Common Misconceptions or Errors
• Students may incorrectly list more outcomes than the experiment merits. To address this
misconception, ensure students can explain the experiment in their own words to then
verify what is listed in their sample space.
105 | P a g e

===== B1G-M-Grd7-TI · page 106 =====
Strategies to Support Tiered Ins truction
• Teacher provides examples of situations and has students decide on the sample space
necessary.
• Teacher co - creates a graphic organizer with different examples of sample spaces with the
use of virtual manipulatives.
• Teacher co - creates a graphic organizer of a T - chart to list the experiment and the sample
space necessary for the examples provided.
• Te a cher co - creates models with students to represent sample spaces using a coin, fair die,
fair spinner or deck of cards.
• Teacher ensures students can explain the experiment in their own words to then verify
what is listed in their sample space.
Instructional Tasks
Instructional Task 1 (MTR.4.1)
List all of the possible outcomes for each experiment.
Experiment Sample Space
rolling a 12 - sided fair die
flipping a coin
pulling a face card from a standard deck of cards
a spin from the spinner
Compare your list with a partner and identify any differences. Allow each partner time to
discuss their reasoning until an agreement is reached on the correct sample space.
Instructional Items
Instructional Item 1
Letter cards for the word “probability” are placed into a bag. List the sample space for
choosing a card from this bag.
Instructional Item 2
There are 10 blue, 5 green and 7 white marbles in a jar. List the sample space for the simple
experiment of choosing a marble from the jar.
*The strategies, tasks and items included in the B1G - M are examples and should not be considered comprehensive.
106 | P a g e

===== B1G-M-Grd7-TI · page 107 =====
MA.7.DP.2.2
Benchmark
Given the probability of a chance event, interpret the likelihood of it occurring.
MA.7.DP.2.2
Compare the probabilities of chance events.
Benchmark Clarifications:
Clarification 1: Instruction includes representing probability as a fraction, percentage or decimal between
0 and 1 with probabilities close to 1 corresponding to highly likely events and probabilities close to 0
corresponding to highly unlikely events.
Clarification 2: Instruction includes 𝑃 ( 𝑒𝑣𝑒𝑛𝑡 ) notation.
Clarification 3: Instruction includes representing probability as a fraction, percentage or decimal.
Connecting Benchmarks/Horizontal Alignment Terms from the K - 12 Glossary
• MA.7.NSO.1.2 • Event
• Theoretical Probability
Vertical Alignment
Previous Benchmarks Next Benchmarks
• MA.6.NSO.3.5 • MA.8.DP.2. 2, MA.8.DP.2.3
Purpose and Instructional Strategies
In grade 7, students interpret the probability of a chance event and the likelihood of it occurring.
In grade 8, students will solve problems involving probabilities related to single or repeated
experiments, including making predictions based on theoretic al probability.
• An event is a set of outcomes .
o For example , if the experiment is to roll a six - sided die, possible event s could be :
▪ “rolling a 3 or a 4 ; ”
▪ “rolling an even number;” or
▪ “not rolling a 2.”
• Instruction includes the understand ing that some events can have a probability of 1 or 0.
Students should understand that if an event has a probability of zero, the event is
impossible or will not occur. If an event has a probability of one, the event is certain or
must occur.
o For example, in the experiment of rolling a 6 - sided die, the event of rolling a 1, 2,
3, 4, 5 or 6 would have a probability of 1.
o For example, when rolling a 6 - sided fair die, the event of rolling a 7 would have a
probability of 0.
• Instruction includes having students use pr obabilities of 1, 0.5 and 0 as benchmark
probabilities to interpret the likelihood of other events.
o For example, if a student wants to interpret the likelihood represented by the
probability of 80%, they can compare 80% to the benchmark probabilities of 5 0%
and 100%.
• If an event has a probability of 0.5, it can be interpreted that is has the same likelihood as
its opposite.
o For example, in the experiment of picking a card from a standard 52 - card deck,
the event of picking a red card has a probability of 0.5, which can be interpreted
as having the same likelihood as the opposite event, which is picking a black card.
Common Misconceptions or Errors
107 | P a g e

===== B1G-M-Grd7-TI · page 108 =====
• Students may invert the meaning of an event and an experiment.
• Students may confuse the mathematical meaning of a word like “event” with the
everyday meaning.
• Students may incorrectly convert forms of probability b etween fractions and percentages .
To address this misconception, scaffold with more familiar values initially to facilitate
the interpretation.
• Students may incorrectly interpret a value with a negative sign as a possible probability.
1
o For example , − cannot represent a probability since negative values are less than
2
0.
Strategies to Support Tiered Instruction
• Teacher creates and posts an anchor chart with visual representations of probability terms
to assist students in correct academic vocabulary when solving real - world problems.
• Teacher provides opportunities for students to use a 100 frame to review place v alue for
and the con nections to decimal, fractional and percentage forms of probabilities .
• Instruction includes the use of a 100 frame to review place value for tenths, hundredths,
and if needed, thousandths and the connections for decimal and fractional f orms of
probabilities .
• When students incorrectly convert from one form to another (i.e, fraction to percentage),
the t eacher scaffolds with more familiar values initially to facilitate the interpretation.
Instructional Tasks
Instructional Task 1 (MTR.1.1)
Determine which of the following could represent the probability of an event. For those that
can, provide a possible event that would fit the probability given.
Probability Possible Probability? (Y or N) If Yes, Describe an Event
1. 0 . 8
2. − 1
3
3.
8
4. 0
5. 5
1
6.
2
1
7.
−
2
8. 1 . 2
Instructional Items
Instructional Item 1
In each scenario, a probability is given. Describe each event as likely, unlikely or neither .
a. The probability of a hurricane being within 100 miles of a location in two days is
40%.
108 | P a g e

===== B1G-M-Grd7-TI · page 109 =====
b. The probability of a thunderstorm being located within 5 miles of your ho use
9
sometime tomorrow is .
10
c. The probability of a given baseball player getting at least three hits in the game today
is 0.08.
*The strategies, tasks and items included in the B1G - M are examples and should not be considered comprehensive.
MA.7.DP.2.3
Benchmark
MA.7.DP.2.3 Find the theoretical probability of an event related to a simple experiment .
Benchmark Clarifications:
Clarification 1: Instruction includes representing probability as a fraction, percentage or decimal.
Clarification 2: Simple experiments include tossing a fair coin, rolling a fair die, picking a card randomly
from a deck, picking marbles randomly from a bag and spinning a fair spinner.
Connecting Benchmarks/Horizontal Alignment Terms from the K - 12 Glossary
• MA.7.NSO.1.2 • E vent
• T heoretical P robability
Vertical Alignment
Previous Benchmarks Next Benchmarks
• MA.6.NSO.3.5 • MA.8.DP.2.1 , MA.8.DP.2.2 ,
MA.8.DP.2.3
Purpose and Instructional Strategies
In grade 7, students find the theoretical probability of an event related to a simple experiment ,
and in grade 8 , they will find the theoretical probability of an event related to a repeated
experiment.
• Instruction builds on finding sample spaces from MA.7.DP.2.1. Have students discuss
their under standing of the words “theor etical ” and “probability” to build toward a formal
definition of theoretical probability.
• When finding theoretical probability, have students work from their sample space . Doing
so will lead to the understanding that since expe riments for this benchmark are fair, the
𝑛𝑢𝑚𝑏𝑒𝑟 𝑜𝑓 𝑜𝑢𝑡𝑐𝑜𝑚𝑒𝑠 𝑖𝑛 𝑡 ℎ 𝑒 𝑒𝑣𝑒𝑛𝑡
probability of an event is equivalent to .
𝑛𝑢𝑚𝑏𝑒𝑟 𝑜𝑓 𝑜𝑢𝑡𝑐𝑜𝑚𝑒𝑠 𝑖𝑛 𝑡 ℎ 𝑒 𝑠𝑎𝑚𝑝𝑙𝑒 𝑠𝑝𝑎𝑐𝑒
o For example, if rolling a fair 6 - sided di e, the sample space is {1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6,}. If
one wants to find 𝑃 ( 𝑟𝑜𝑙𝑙𝑖𝑛𝑔 𝑎𝑛 𝑜𝑑𝑑 𝑛𝑢𝑚𝑏𝑒𝑟 ) , students can circle all of the odd
3
numbers from the sample space to determine the probability as , or 0.5 .
6
• While the benchmark does focus on fa ir experiments, instruction could include spinners
with unequal sections making the connection to angle measures and to circle graphs.
• Instruction focuses on the simple experiments listed in Clarification 2 .
o For example, when tossing a coin with one side colored yellow and the other side
colored red , 𝑃 ( 𝑙𝑎𝑛𝑑𝑖𝑛𝑔 𝑜𝑛 𝑏𝑙𝑢𝑒 ) = 0 .
o For example, when rolling a 10 - sided die, 𝑃 ( 𝑛𝑜𝑡 𝑟𝑜𝑙𝑙𝑖𝑛𝑔 𝑎 𝑚𝑢𝑙𝑡𝑖𝑝𝑙𝑒 𝑜𝑓 3 ) =
0 . 7 .
o For example, when picking a card from a deck that contains each of the letters of
109 | P a g e

===== B1G-M-Grd7-TI · page 110 =====
21
the alphabet, 𝑃 ( 𝑝𝑖𝑐𝑘𝑖𝑛𝑔 𝑎 𝑐𝑜𝑛𝑠𝑜𝑛𝑎𝑛𝑡 ) = .
26
o For example, when p icking a tiles from a bag that contains a set of chess pieces,
𝑃 ( 𝑝𝑖𝑐𝑘𝑖𝑛𝑔 𝑎 𝑝𝑎𝑤𝑛 ) = 50% .
o For example, when s pinning a spinner that contains 5 sections where two of the
sections are green and the remaining sections are red, white and blue,
3
𝑃 ( 𝑙𝑎𝑛𝑑𝑖𝑛𝑔 𝑜𝑛 𝑎 𝑐𝑜𝑙𝑜𝑟 𝑓𝑟𝑜𝑚 𝑡 ℎ 𝑒 𝐴𝑚𝑒𝑟𝑖𝑐𝑎𝑛 𝑓𝑙𝑎𝑔 ) = .
5
Common Misconc eptions or Errors
• Students may incorrectly convert forms of probability between fractions and percent age s.
To address this misconception, scaffold with more familiar values initially to facilitate
the interpretation.
• Students may incorrectly count outcomes when one outcome appears more than once in
the sample space.
o For example, if the sample space is {red, red, blue} and one wants to find
1 1 2
𝑃 ( 𝑟𝑒𝑑 ) , a student may incorrectly state or instead of .
2 3 3
Strategies to Support Tiered Instruction
• Teacher provides instruction in converting between fractions and percentages, by using
more familiar values.
1 1 1
o For example, = 50% , = 25% , ≈ 33 . 3% , etc.
2 4 3
• Teacher co - creates a T - chart (like the one below) to list the experiment and the sample
space necessary for the examples provided.
Experiment Sample Space
Tossing a coin H, T
Drawing a marble from a bag R1, R2, R3, G1, G2
containing 3 red marbles and 2 green or
marbles R, R, R, G, G
Rolling a 6 - sided die 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6
110 | P a g e

===== B1G-M-Grd7-TI · page 111 =====
Instructional Tasks
Instructional Task 1 (MTR.4.1, MTR.7.1)
Look at the shirt you are wearing today and determine how many buttons it has. Then
complete the following table for all the members of your class.
Suppose each student writes his or her name on an index card, and one card is selected
randomly.
Part A. What is the probability that the student whose card is selected is wearing a shirt
with no buttons?
Part B . What is the probability that the student whose card is selected is female and is
wearing a shirt with two or fewer buttons?
Instructional Task 2 (MTR.4.1, MTR.5.1)
There is only one question on the next quiz and it will be true or false.
Part A. If a student randomly answers the question, w hat is the probability of earning a
score of 100%?
Part B. What is the probability of earning a 50%?
Instructional Items
Instructional Item 1
What is the probability of choosing a 9 from a standard deck of 52 cards?
Instructional Item 2
There are 7 red, 5 blue and 12 green marbles in a bag.
Part A. What is the probability of choosing a red marble?
Part B. What is the probability of not choosing a green marble?
Part C. What is the probability of choosing a yellow marble?
Part D. What is the probability of choosing a red or blue marble?
*The strategies, tasks and items included in the B1G - M are examples and should not be considered comprehensive.
111 | P a g e

===== B1G-M-Grd7-TI · page 112 =====
MA.7.DP.2.4
Benchmark
Use a simulation of a simple experiment to find experimental probabilities and
MA.7.DP.2.4
compare them to theoretical probabilities.
Example: Investigate whether a coin is fair by tossing it 1,000 times and comparing the
percentage of heads to the theoretical probability 0.5.
Benchmark Clarifications:
Clarification 1: Instruction includes representing probability as a fraction, percentage or decimal.
Clarification 2: Instruction includes recognizing that experimental probabilities may differ from
theoretical probabilities due to random variation. As the number of repe titions increases experimental
probabilities will typically better approximate the theoretical probabilities.
Clarification 3: Experiments include tossing a fair coin, rolling a fair die, picking a card randomly from a
deck, picking marbles randomly from a bag and spinning a fair spinner.
Connecting Benchmarks/Horizontal Alignment Terms from the K - 12 Glossary
• MA.7.NSO.1.2 • E vent
• MA.7. AR. 3.1 • E xperimental P robability
• S imulation
• T heoretical P robability
Vertical Alignment
Previous Benchmarks Next Benchmarks
• MA.6.NSO.3.5 • MA.8.DP.2.1 , MA.8.DP.2.2 ,
MA.8.DP.2.3
Purpose and Instructional Strategies
In grade 7, students use a simulation of a simple experiment to find experimental probabilities
and compare them to theoretical probabilities. In grade 8, students will solve real - world
problems involving probabilities related to single or repeated experim ents, including making
predictions based on theoretical probability.
• Instruction includes opportunities for students to run various numbers of trials to discover
that the increased repetition of the experiment will bring the experimental probability
closer to the theoretical. Use virtual simulations to quickly show higher and higher
volumes of repetition that would be difficult to create with physical manipulatives
(MTR.5.1) .
• Remind students that chance has no memory and each repetition in the simulation ha s the
same probability distribution for the possible events.
o For example, if you flip a coin and it lands on heads, the next flip does not rely on
the first outcome and still can be either heads or tails.
• Instruction focuses on the simple experiments list ed in Clarification 3 .
o For example, students can roll a 6 - sided die 30 times to determine the
experimental pr obability of “not rolling a 2.” Students can then compare their
experimental probability to the theoretical p robability of “not rolling a 2,” which
5
is .
6
Common Misconceptions or Errors
112 | P a g e

===== B1G-M-Grd7-TI · page 113 =====
• Students may incorrectly assume the theoretical and experimental probabilities of the
same experiment will always be the same. To address this misconception, provide
multiple opportunities for students to experience simulations of different situations, wit h
physical or virtual manipulatives, in order to find and compare the experimental and
theoretical probabilities.
• Students may incorrectly expect to see every possible outcome occur during a simulation.
While all may occur in a simulation, it is not certai n to happen. Students may
inadvertently let their own experience with an experiment affect their response.
o For example , during an exp eriment if a student never draws an ace from a
standard deck of cards , this does not indicate it could never happen.
Strategies to Support Tiered Instruction
• Teacher reviews the root words theoretical (theory) and experimental (experiment) and
discuss es the difference between a theoretical probability and experiment al probability .
Teacher provides graphic organizer to keep as reference for root words.
o For example, experimental probabilities are from simulations whereas theoretical
probabilities are from calculations.
• Teacher provides opportunities to see a variety of outcomes.
o For example, open a deck of cards and draw 5 random cards. After looking at the
5 cards, discuss all the possible cards that could have been drawn but were not.
This will help students see that not all possible outcomes will occur when an
experiment is done.
• Teacher provides multiple examples for students to discuss if a probability in the example
is theoretical or experimental. After each answer, students discuss how they know it is
theoretical or experimental.
o For example, if one tosses a fair coin, the theoretical probability of la nding on
heads is 0.5. If one tosses a fair coin 14 times and it lands on hands 9 times, the
9
experimental probability of landing on heads is based on the simulation.
14
• Teacher provides multiple opportunities for students to experience simulations of
different situations, with physical or virtual manipulatives, in order to find and compare
the experimental and theoretical probabilities.
Instructional Tasks
Instructional Task 1 (MTR.4.1)
Each set of partners has been given a bag containing 5 red, 5 green, 5 yellow and 10 brown
candies.
Part A. Determine the theoretical probability for selecting one red candy at random from
the bag. Do the same for blue, yellow and brown.
Number of Candies Theoretical Frequency Experimental
Color
in the Bag Probability by Trials Probability
Red 5
Blue 5
Yellow 5
Brown 10
Part B. Experimental Trials: Select one candy from the bag, record its color in the table
below and return it to the bag. Repeat this process for a total of 20 trials.
113 | P a g e

===== B1G-M-Grd7-TI · page 114 =====
Trial Color Trial Color Trial Color Trial Color
1 6 11 16
2 7 12 17
3 8 13 18
4 9 14 19
5 10 15 20
Part C. In the original table, record the total frequency of each color based on your 20
trials. Then calculate the experimental probability for each. How do the
theoretical and experimental probabilities compare?
Part D. Collect the data from 2 other sets of partners and combine your total frequencies.
Complete the table below based on those 60 trials. How do the theoretical and
experimental probabilities compare? How does that compare to your original
calculations using 20 trials?
Number of Theoretical Frequency Experimental
Color
Candies in t he Bag Probability by Trials Probability
Red 5
Blue 5
Yellow 5
Brown 10
Part E . Collect all of the class data to calculate new total frequencies and complete the
table below.
Number of Theoretical Frequency Experimental
Color
Candies in the Bag Probability by Trials Probability
Red 5
Blue 5
Yellow 5
Brown 10
Part F.
• How do the theoretical and experimental probabilities compare?
• How does that compare to the calculations using 20 trials and 60 trials?
• What conclusions can you make about theoretical and experimental probabilities
based on this information?
Instructional Items
Instructional Item 1
A bag contains green marbles and purple marbles. If a marble is randomly selected from the
bag, the probability that it is green is 0.6 and the probability that it is purple is 0.4. Dylan
draws a marble from the bag, notes its color, and returns it to the bag. He does this 50 times.
Approximately, h ow many times would you expect Dylan to draw a green marble?
*The strategies, tasks and items included in the B1G - M are examples and should not be considered comprehensive.
114 | P a g e
